:
Today, Digital technology not only helps its users in every walk of life to address human limitations but
also to control and direct their ideologies. Hence, the novel concept of advanced Transhumanism is
prevalent. This Study seeks to explore the possibilities of conducting research in the field of Human
Language and Digital Technology amidst related fields. The article presents theoretical concepts and
methodological tools from multimodal analysis that allow the readers to gain new insights into the study of
electronic literature and the difference between a monomodal and multimodal children literature. The data
for this article comes from Grimm brothers’ transcribed tale named “Little Red Riding Hood” directly from
fairy tale narrated by their villagers and the digital novel “red riding hood” from the 1st Collection of
Electronic Literature. The discussion and analysis part of the project explains how various modes can be
used to convey the underlying meanings clearly and create a single masterpiece which is suggested as a
new form of literature.

Since the definition of literature does not match with this innovative form, the article suggests that it
should be revised again, which says that literature is anything written, in an artistic form of human
expressions in an organized manner. But, as far as a multimodal piece of work is concerned, it is a
combination of distinct (mono)modal structures such as sounds, visual images, spatial and textual
evidence. These all modes are shown in red riding hood specifically and the other literary works in the 1st
Collection of Electronic Literature in general.

Since, in Pakistan, the investigations in this field are rare so it provides the basis for future studies in the
field of human language and digital technology and other above mentioned related areas. Also, this

59

ELO 2021 - abstracts

research can open up new ways for immersive literacy and for the researchers to focus on the innovative
immersive literacy, its need, impacts, social consequences, and other possible transformations it requires
for the born-digital generation.

