:
The (auto)biography of 김정은 (2020) is a conceptual ‘found’ artwork in VII parts. It combines found code
with found text. Multiple ‘found’ computational pieces have been modified with vocabulary drawn from
multiple speeches delivered by the current North Korean Leader, Kim Jong-un/김정은. In addition,
vocabulary and phrases from journalism critical of the North Korean regime are also incorporated into
these generative works. On the one hand, this work is an experiment in propaganda delivery: it emulates
the relentlessness of the North Korean indoctrination machine and shows how born-digital writing can be
stolen and misused; in so doing, it reveals digital literature’s power. As part of this process, a Kim Jong-un
‘poetic robot’ has been created to demonstrate how such propaganda might be delivered/forced upon a
populace. This work also seeks to capture the perspective of a curious, intelligent yet powerless North
Korean citizen and demonstrate how they might (struggle to) engage with local culture.

39

ELO 2021 - abstracts

This paper reflects on this artwork in relation to Critical Code Studies (Marino, 2020). Specifically, it looks
at how code can be adopted and exploited. Through practice-led research (Smith and Dean, 2009), this
work deliberately exploits the code of multiple digital poets in order to show how such works might be
corrupted. These subsequent works can be regarded as an example of third generation electronic
literature (Flores, 2019). These works can also be regarded as an example of ‘overt plagiarism’
(Holland-Batt and Jeffery, 2020). If the works’ ‘fictional’ construction is believed, then it would be an
example of ‘covert plagiarism’.

Additionally, this paper looks at how this code and corrupted poetry could be reformed into robotic poetics
(Winder, 2004). Through this extension to robotic poetics, this paper extends the notion of Critical Code
Studies, by extending it to robotics, and interrogating what impact such an artefact has on transforming
the initial work.

WORKS CITED

Flores, L. (2019) ‘Third Generation Electronic Literature’, Electronic Book Review. Retrieved from
https://electronicbookreview.com/essay/third-generation-electronic-literature/ (accessed 14 January,
2021).

Holland-Batt, S. and Jeffrey, E. (2020) ‘Covert and Overt Plagiarism: On Poetry and Theft’, Copyright Law
and the Creative Industries. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dejfmNxfSMM&t=108s
(accessed 14 January, 2021).

Marino, M. (2020) Critical Code Studies, MIT Press: Cambridge.

Smith, H. and Dean, R. (2009) Practice-led Research, Research-led Practice in the Creative Arts,
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

Winder, W. (2004) ‘Robotic Poetics’, A Companion to Digital Humanities, ed. Susan Schreibman, Ray
Siemens, John Unsworth. Oxford: Blackwell. Retrieved from

http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/ (accessed 14 January, 2021).

Wright, D.T.H. and Griffin, B. (2020) The (auto)biography of 김정은. Retrieved from http://autokju.net
(accessed 14 January, 2021).

40

ELO 2021 - abstracts

