:
The global coronavirus pandemic has brought up a series of challenges which have made us change our
lifestyle by balancing work and family life, education and recreation. It has brought up feelings of
uncertainty, isolation, hopelessness, fear, anxiety, depression, stress; impacting on our mental health and
well-being as well as our economic situation. This global disaster has hitted harder those people from
disadvantaged backgrounds, such as socioeconomic status, physical and health issues, living in violent
and abusive relationships and has brought up to light the imbalance in society.

For some of us, online platforms have served to make this situation more bearable. We are learning to do
what we did before at a distance. Based on this and previous creative projects where we were already
dealing with a community-based goal, the aim of this workshop is to make visible ( through sharing)
social, personal or collective issues/challenges which have become more apparent during the pandemic.

We will be using digital methodologies of collaboration and visualisation to highlight the main concerns of
the community taking part in this discussion. For this purpose, we will be providing an online platform
where participants will be able to share a personal or collective issue to heal. These stories will be

88

ELO 2021 - abstracts

distributed amongst the participants, who will find solutions to heal them through a creative digital
proposal. All participants sharing and healing will be anonymous.

This exchanging storytelling platform gathers, distributes and serves as an archive from which to draw
information about the concerns of that particular community. The main keywords/concerns will be
visualised with links to the stories and the healing’s proposals so the whole group can engage in
meaningful conversations.

We are hoping to make this workshop prototype a sustainable tool to be shared between any other
community groups and creators/academics with the possibility of the application of different parameters.

Duration: 60 minutes
Participants: 5 minimum and 20 max

