:
For individuals who have suffered from abuse, working with hyperlink texts can provide an opportunity to
unpack trauma and experience catharsis. “Thin Spaces” is hyperlink fiction that introduces interactors to a
narrator reliving her experiences of being in an abusive marriage and her subsequent PTSD. Through
presenting this autobiographical IDN, the hope is to shed light on abuse cycles and demonstrate one way
that they can be broken. “Thin Spaces” weaves through two timelines: a personal timeline of key
moments surrounding the abuse and a genealogical timeline consisting of historical documents and family
stories of the narrator’s ancestors. The blending of personal experience and genealogy shows that abuse
can span generations. The initial framework of the story forms a cycle that culminates in a therapy
session. This lexia’s one hyperlink takes readers back to an earlier lexia in the story. This earlier lexia
maintains its initial hyperlinks but introduces a new option to break the cycle using an italicized sentence
offset from the rest of the text. The strand of lexia proceeding from this new hyperlink moves interactors
through the aftermath of the narrator’s divorce, culminating in the hope that survival is possible. Like
PTSD, some options in the new lexia–with inverse colors from the initial cycle–cause the reader to
re-experience the traumatic episodes of the piece and require them to make the conscious decision to
either hit the previous screen arrow within Twine to exit that phase quickly or work through the abusive
sections again to find their way back out of the abuse. Being given this choice ties to the aftermath of
trauma in which some PTSD episodes can be resolved quickly through deep breathing, self-talk, or
somatic strategies while other episodes resist these tactics and take longer to escape. The interactor
must be cognizant of the strategy of clicking the previous screen arrow in order to avoid lapsing back into
a more lengthy process of sifting through abusive flashbacks, which parallels abuse survivors needing to
have the wherewithal to employ the strategies they learn in order to avoid more serious flashbacks or
PTSD episodes. At its conclusion, Thin Spaces shifts to the narrator in a healthier place, though still using
coping mechanisms to deal with the effects of the trauma. The piece allows readers the choice to exit with
the call of the common loon, a calming yet mournful sound. With this presentation, the audience will have
access to “Thin Spaces” and see how the author’s writing process unfolded, including choices in structure
and color as well as the personal experience of writing autobiographically about trauma.

76

ELO 2021 - abstracts

