:
Electronic literature and computer games share a common history beginning from the earliest adventure
games (Rettberg 87). As both the “technological platforms” that host electronic literature and games, and
the “social contexts” that inform them evolve, so does the content, gameplay, and types of interactions
they facilitate (Rettberg). The development of the Tinder platform and other mediated dating applications
has precipitated the incorporation of interactive fiction games into the dating experience.

The conception of dating as a game is by no means a new phenomenon. The “pickup” model of dating
considers interactions between potential sexual partners to be governed by a set of rules that participants
can learn in order to “win”(Almog and Kaplan). While such practices existed long before digitally mediated
dating sites, applications like Tinder extend the gamification of dating; the Tinder platform further gamified
these experiences with the release of the electronic literature game, Swipe Night, which debuted in
October 2019. Swipe Night, in the model of hypertextual fiction, allowed users to play through a narrative,
making choices that impacted the resulting storyline.

Swipe Night was intended to connect users in new matches based on their choices as they navigate
through the Swipe Night story, a deviation from Tinder’s usual matching via geographic proximity alone.
The game played out over four weeks, with each week continuing the story from the week before. The
in-app interactive narrative was largely successful, with over a million people tuning in each week (Perez).
The Swipe Night trailer began making its rounds on tinder and other social media apps in late September
2019. In the 45 second trailer, users were introduced to the concept of the narrative: “Every Sunday,
experience an interactive adventure where your choices can lead to matches. But you only have till
midnight until the adventure is over” (Timmermans and De Caluwé).

While the Tinder application has, since its inception, facilitated the gamification of dating through its
fast-paced, turn-based interactions, the debut of the hypertextual fiction Swipe Night further underscored
the game-like interactions of the platform. However, Swipe Night also enabled community development
based around common choices within the narrative, and fostered discussion among Tinder users on a
variety of platforms. While users’ Tinder data is ephemeral and not publicly available, cross platform

82

ELO 2021 - abstracts

conversations offer insight into user perceptions and experiences navigating the Tinder platform, and
Swipe Night in particular. This study examines user reactions to the Swipe Night event on the subreddit
r/Tinder; some users praised the unique matches they were able to form through interaction with the
electronic narrative, while others lamented the effectiveness of the fiction for facilitating the development
of actual relationships. As the formation of both communities and romantic relationships increasingly
occurs via digitally mediated communication, a study of Tinder’s Swipe Night event provides essential
insight into both the gamification of human interaction and audience reception of these developing
interactive fiction technologies.

