:
Though not an ideal solution, lyric reflection can be a significant method of preserving electronic literature.

118

ELO 2021 - abstracts

Having lost Flash, one solution is mimetic: a technical project resulting in a faithful copy of the original
work, allowing the work to be experienced in all its particularity and interactivity. Failing that, footage,
screenshots, and thorough, plainly descriptive writing can make a long-term accessible record so that at
least that space in the genre’s history can be seen and understood by future generations. What happens,
however, when a work a work features elements of ephemerality? On a computational level, this can
happen to a far greater degree than with a traditional print book. Outside of rare tragedies, we can
retrieve an old text from the archives, but we cannot retrieve the experience of, for instance, Multi-User
Dungeons in the late 1990s. Lyric recollection, however, provides a literary model for securing something
very close to the experience of the work.

Two particularly notable sources here are William Wordsworth for an early example and Indra Sinha for a
specifically elit example. In his preface to the second edition of Lyrical Ballads, Wordsworth wrote, “poetry
is the spontaneous overflow of powerful feelings: it takes its origin from emotion recollected in tranquility
… the emotion is contemplated till, by a species of reaction, the tranquility gradually disappears, and an
emotion, kindred to that which was before the subject of contemplation, is gradually produced, and does
itself actually exist in the mind.” The poem, therefore, is not located in the original experience nor is it
trying to be a mimetic copy of it. In the tranquil reflection, however, the poet is able, ideally, to capture the
process of remembering so clearly that a new instance of the original type of emotion is actively produced
by this new virtual encounter. In a similar way, Sinha records 1990s MUDs in his 1999 memoir The
Cybergypsies, carefully shifting between forms to recreate the imaginative depth of the experience. We
might also imagine a lighter form of this in the wild success of Façade – which parallels something of the
social, writing-based experience of MUDS – on YouTube.

Pavel Curtis suggests in 1997 that “it is difficult to properly convey the sense of the experience in words.
Readers desiring more detailed information are advised to try mudding themselves” (124-5). Writing such
as Sinha’s presents a model for how we might preserve important elements of generational and
platform-specific electronic literature for future personal, authorial, and scholarly consideration. Such
writing about personal online experience was popular around that time. In 2020, Anna Weiner’s Uncanny
Valley and Joanne McNeil’s Lurking indicate a return to this more broadly. Among more formal archival
efforts, in imagining a long literature history of elit for the future, lyric narratives – particularly in
incorporating instances of the computer text as in Sinha – will inevitably play a significant role in how
future generations ephemeral and social elit works.

119

ELO 2021 - abstracts

