:
We will discuss the issue of the platformization of culture from a Latin-American perspective and
decolonial thinking. Platforms strive on the automated algorithmic administration of access and
reproduction of creative works (text, sound, video, o code-based). The common trait of current platform
culture is the maximization of profit by means of garnering data and attention in order to capture more
attention (and more data). In this context, is there any space for pursuing artistic digital activism and
decolonial e-lit? The presentations in this panel will try to answer this question. The panel will be
Spanish-English based in a sort of tentative of linguistic decolonization of e-lit field:

Agustín Berti: The Country and the Platform, or The Issue of Nanofundia
The issue of latifundia and the consolidation of vast productive land owned by a very reduced minority of
wealthy elites has been one of the distinctive traits of lasting inequalities in Latin-American countries. This
has seemingly nothing to do with digital culture, and yet this push forward the concept of nanofundia as a
continuation of the reprimarization of production in the developing world and the digital extractivism of
platform economy described by Pasquinelli and Joler. If there is any chance of reverting this situation in
terms of decolonial geopolitics of electronic literature, the struggles will be about national and regional
digital infraestructures and the local regulations over the globalized attention economies.

Anahí Re: It Will Be Difficult or Won’t Be. Challenges of Latin-American E-Lit.
Platforms that nowadays enable large scale production and distribution of third generation e-lit (Flores),
and even this kind of e-lit itself, promote a specific temporality. Doing so they guarantee the permanence
of users in social media. What is at stake is clearly our “available attention” (Stiegler). Following Stiegler’s
organological perspective, this presentation will focus on why “the difficult” (Tisselli/Torres) is, and should
always be, an emancipatory alternative within Latin American poetic industries.

Claudia Kozak: Occupy the Platforms. Scope and Limitations of Decolonial Contemporary E-Lit.
This presentation will analyze cases of Latin American e-lit that particularly engage to deconstruct and/or
occupy contemporary platform culture. Being these cases either strictly experimental e-lit based on “the
difficult” (Tisselli/ Torres), or digital activism in indigenous languages or even attempts of decolonial
mixtures between experimentalism and third-generation platform e-lit, there is an opening for discussing

29

ELO 2021 - abstracts

how e-lit might temporarily occupy contemporary platforms without being (completely) absorbed by their
agenda.

Leonardo Solaas: The Pull of The Banal: Digital Systems and Programmed Freedom
Internet platforms are based on a perfect formula: they provide us with the endless satisfaction of
choosing, while they get to know all about us and better anticipate our tastes and desires. They create for
us dazzling worlds of perfect visibility, while their own logic recedes into the unreachable depths of an
ever-blacker box. We will analyze how the space of possibilities generated by digital systems deploys a
field of power under the guise of freedom, and how users can adopt three positions with regards to it:
integration, rebellion, or critique.

