:

Recent researches have revealed some of the factors that seem to hinder both the production of digital
literary contents for young readers and their diffusion in the school context. Within the framework of the
project led by Nathalie Lacelle (2017-2020) and dedicated to accompanying the development of digital
children’s publishing initiatives in Quebec, three major issues have particularly emerged:

- a lack of knowledge about the current editorial offer, by educators, librarians and, more generally, by
common readers;

- a difficulty in including e-literary creations in the school canon and in conceiving pertinent educative
materials, that seems to be mostly provoked by an unfamiliarity with the poetics and the rhetoric of digital
texts;

- a lack of understanding, by creators and publishers, of the young readers’ psycho-cognitive and
affective specificities, as well as of the constraints and conditions that define the school reading process.

47

ELO 2021 - abstracts

In order to reduce these limitations, to stimulate the reading practices and, at the same time, to develop
young readers’ competencies in digital literacy, a website dedicated to children’s digital literature has
been conceived, in partnership with the Littérature Québecoise Mobile group, directed by Bertrand
Gervais: Lab-yrinthe.

The website is intended as a virtual laboratory on contemporary children’s digital literary phenomena and
aims at providing information based on scientific observations, as well as conceptual and didactic tools to
educators, publishers and researchers.

More particularly, Lab-yrinthe presents a catalog of heterogeneous digital literary works produced or
distributed in Quebec, including enriched books, mobile apps, narrative video games, geolocated
narrations, augmented reality creations, interactive theater performances, virtual installations and
podcasts. Each creation is analyzed from a set of descriptive parameters conceived by the research team
(Acerra, Lacelle et al., 2021) with the purpose to illustrate the semiotic, multimodal and technological
materials of the text, as well as the poetic or rhetoric effects of their combinations. From this basis, some
educational and didactic suggestions are depicted: teachers can refer to this section to find a reading key
of the digital work and, at the same time, to have clear examples of the possible exploitations of a digital
writing process in the school context.

Finally, a dedicated section of the Lab-yrinthe website presents the main co-creation and co-production
projects, carried out with partners from the cultural industry (ranging from the National television, to the
Montréal Poetry Festival and Bookfair, from digital and analog publishers to National libraries and
archives). In this case, both the actors, the contents and the distribution conditions are presented as
indicators of the current orientations of the digital publishing field.

Bibliography

Acerra, E., Lacelle, N., et al. (2021, in press). « Décrire les œuvres littéraires numériques pour la
jeunesse », Lire, comprendre, interpréter et apprécier des supports composites, La Lettre de l’AIRDF, n°
68.

Lacelle, N., et al. (2017-2020). Soutien au développement de démarches d’édition numérique jeunesse
au Québec à partir de pratiques favorables de production, diffusion et réception. Research project
financed by the Fonds de Recherche Société et Culture (Québec).

48

ELO 2021 - abstracts

