:
This submission to the 2021 ELO Conference and Media Arts Festival is both a virtual engagement event,
a submission of a novel work of electronic literature for the Platforming Utopias (and Platformed
Dystopias) exhibition, and, lastly, an introductory performance, proposed as a way of setting the
‘Aarhus-vibe’ of the conference.

Aarhus Urban Operating System (AaUOS) both is a piece that meditates the generational conflicts of e-lit
by situating e-literary encounters with Aarhus that invites for a virtual dérive of a platformed imaginary of
the city.

This year’s ELO conference takes place online – across a number of global partner institutions, and will
be hosted ‘in’ Aarhus, which is to say at Aarhus University’s server. Instead of visiting the city of Aarhus
physically, participants in this year’s conference will visit the rather unspectacular platform
conferences.au.dk, which (apart from the name and logo) has little to do with neither the physical
actualities of Aarhus as a place nor the creative, literary, and intellectual qualities of Aarhus as a space.

This virtual engagement proposal seeks to situate an e-literary encounter with Aarhus that exists at the
intersection of (1) the ELO conference and its participants, (2) corporate visons for city development in
Aarhus, and (3) a chatterbot-esque interface aesthetic that is connected to a generative, neural
network-based bot.

By situating a parasitic interface based on the official ELO conference website, AaUOS enacts the
‘flipside’ of the glossy, corporate-esque images and videos of Aarhus offered by the University
management (see attachment for a sketch of the work [in Danish; the work itself will be in English]).

In this way AaUOS is both a case of 3rd gen e-lit, existing within the framework of an established
platform, and at the same time, AaUOS is a handcrafted, specifically designed system that can be
associated with the 2nd gen of e-lit. Entering into this position of tension between the generations of e-lit,

12

ELO 2021 - abstracts

the work invites for contemplation of the role of e-lit in the face of the increasing platformization and
Zoomification of society.

On this ‘flipside’ of the conference website, participants are invited to interact with, and mimic, a neural
network that was trained on corporate visions for so-called ‘creative city development’, which is really just
a fetish-relation to words such as ‘concrete’ and ‘building’. By creating an interface that connects these
generative corporate visions and city-imaginaries with a virtual conference on electronic literature, AaUOS
sustains an e-literary encounter with emergent imaginaries of Aarhus, stemming collaboratively from local
city developers, a machine learning algorithm, playful imitative writing practices, and an international
community of scholars.

In the case of AaUOS, the work makes for an unstable and emergent poiesis of a gathering that could
have been, situated in the imaginary of an Aarhus that might still become. Further, AaUOS acts as an
interface to a platformed vision for Aarhus; not quite a traditional situationist dérive of the city, but
something that might become an opportunity to perform an electronic dérive of the city’s platformization.

