:
When the global pandemic spread in early 2020, we, as many others, wondered what was happening and
what it all meant. Almost all cultural activity moved online and the electronic platforms took even stronger
hold of our lives. We started gathering material about the impact of the Covid 19 on e-literature and digital
creativity for a round table presented at the ELOrlando 2020, the first completely online ELO conference
ever. This work led to the project Electronic Literature and Covid 19 (supported by DARIAH EU), which
includes an exhibition at this year’s conference, a research collection at the ELMCIP Knowledge Base,
other presentations and further research.

117

ELO 2021 - abstracts

Life under the pandemic is like living under a largely invisible threat that emerges as catastrophic and
tragic when death rates go up. At other times the threat of the virus is barely visible and can mainly be
traced as deserted streets. Sometimes the way it invades our shared, common imagination gets quickly
normalized as yet another persuasive data visualization, digital map demonstrating a sudden upsurge in
viral spread or simply another infographic with increasing numbers. It might be compared to how Svetlana
Alexievich describes the Chernobyl disaster (in Chernobyl Prayer, (1997), Penguin 2016), as an unknown
catastrophe that was and is difficult to understand for the many Belarusians and Ukrainians living in the
disaster zone since it did not look like war or natural disaster. Chernobyl’s invisible radioactive cloud that
in 1986 spread across Europe, functioned at the time much like invisible viral danger today, as a
post-human, ecological crisis requiring a new understanding and politics. And, like Chernobyl, the
pandemic has demonstrated the fractures in many societies’ foundations such as economic inequality,
racism, inadequately equipped institutions and health services, and incompetent leaders (see also Latour,
Hayles Taussig, Mbembe, Chun et al. in Critical Enquiry, vol. 47, number S2, Winther 2021). Luckily, the
pandemic has also shown caring communities and societies, newfound interests in the domestic, the
local, and the environmental, including the climate crisis (see e.g. Markham AN, Harris A, Luka ME.
Massive and Microscopic Sensemaking During COVID-19 Times. Qualitative Inquiry. October 2020.).

Besides its importance for health, society and the economy, the pandemic might be seen as a
paradigmatic cultural change happening in a time with locked down cultural life, which can be seen from
behind the global screens of platforms. Electronic literature plays an important role in exploring how
people gets through daily life during the pandemic, how we see our homes, communities, cities,
environments, institutions, how people become part of both progressive (BLM, Metoo, etc) and
reactionary (QAnon, etc) movements. Digital platforms have played a large part in this, e.g. through the
various #, through their ways of promoting extremism through profiling algorithms, through their
transforming of institutions, etc.

This panel will present early outcomes of the project, present a framework for the exhibition, and an
analysis of the themes of the submitted works. We will also invite feedback from the ELO community of
researchers, practitioners and artists.

