:
Recent advances in machine learning provide new opportunities for the exploration of creative, interactive
works based around generative text. This paper compares two such works, AI Dungeon (Walton 2019)
and Project December (Rohrer 2020), both of which are built on the same artificial intelligence (AI)
platform, OpenAI’s GPT-2 and GPT-3. In AI Dungeon, the player can choose from several predetermined
worlds, each of which provide a starting point for the story generation. However, while interacting with the
system within this world, the player can stop, edit, modify and retry each utterance, allowing the player to
“sculpt” the AI’s responses, and choose what goes into the AI’s memory, helping to shape the overall
direction of the story. At a broader level, the player can edit world descriptions, insert scripts between the
AI and the player (themselves or others), and share these worlds/scenarios with other players. Similarly,
in Project December, the player interacts with several AI “matrices”, either directly through conversations,
or more indirectly by creating new matrices by defining a starting paragraph and sample responses, which
can then be “spun up”, tested, and tweaked much like the worlds in AI Dungeon. These matrices can also
be shared with other players.

When interacting with both works, there is a need for the player to repeatedly engage with the work to
learn how to entice a satisfying experience from the system (Mitchell 2012; 2020). However, the key
difference is the framing of the experience. In AI Dungeon the person experiencing the work is either
taking on the role of the player, entering text and seeing how the AI responds, or that of an author or
perhaps a co-author, tweaking the input to the AI or its responses or adjusting the underlying scenario to
get a desired response. In contrast, Project December is presented as part of a fictional website for a

7

ELO 2021 - abstracts

“Project December” run by “Rhinehold Data Systems”, promising the opportunity to talk to “the world’s
most super computer”. Upon accessing the “customer terminal”, which looks and feels like an old dialup
terminal, the player takes on the loosely defined role of “Professor Pedersen” whose “.plan file”, dated
November 13, 1982, contains several tasks related to the various “matrices”, suggesting a mystery to be
solved and a larger narrative to be explored. I will argue that whereas AI Dungeon attempts to provide
players with access to and an uncritical understanding of how the underlying AI system works, Project
December’s narrative framing instead defamiliarizes the play experience (Mitchell et al. 2020), potentially
creating a more emotional connection between the player and the “matrices”, and thereby encouraging
the player to critically reflect on the implications of the underlying technological platform.

