:
Theatre is a sometimes forgotten casualty of the current pandemic. Social distancing precludes the
assembly necessary for participatory theatre. Theatre and theatrical improvisation rely on
participants--performers and audiences alike--gathering in the same space, exploiting their physical
proximity to tell stories. Because of the limited modalities of communication, virtual gatherings using
video-conferencing platforms are, at best, an ersatz solution for audiences longing for connection in an
ever more disconnected world. While some performance groups have embraced tele-conferencing and
streaming for workshops, practice and performance, many theatre makers and performers are preferring
to temporarily pause while waiting for the conditions of performance to resume [1]. We took the opposite
view, believing that live theatre cannot wait for the pandemic to wane.

We therefore built a computer tool for online performance. Our system, called the Virtual Director, enables
actors to recreate a feeling of presence with stage partners while performing and storytelling remotely [2].

20

ELO 2021 - abstracts

Our research combines cinematic and video communication technologies with the theatrical practice of
improvisational and scripted theatre, and aims at recreating presence, virtually.

Virtual Director relies on commodity software (TouchDesigner, web browsers), widely adopted video
conferencing tools (Zoom, Microsoft Teams) and streaming platforms (YouTube, Twitch)--digital platforms
for streaming and video conferencing that we subverted for participatory online performances.

We deployed Virtual Director during community-based performances at the Online Paris Fringe festival.
We noticed that the audience was curious about new interaction formats and performance modalities. We
believe that our streamed performances redefined the nature of live performance, as we identified four
levels of participation: performer, privileged audience member, general audience member, and onlooker
who watches the recording of the show. First, our tool enabled visual collocation and presence among
performers. Second, Virtual Director enabled visual collocation and audio interaction between selected
audience members and the performers, or recreated visual presence if we placed them in a virtual
“amphitheatre”. Third, audiences could interact indirectly via chat. Finally, onlookers followed the show via
streaming. As a complement to previous analyses of the performers’ experience of presence in a
tele-immersive virtual space [2], this paper examines the perception of the performance by audiences and
their participation in collective storytelling; we situate our work in literature on improvisation and
interactive performance.

As we performed remotely with multilingual actors from different countries, we exploited live translation
and speech recognition technology to enable actors to improvise in multiple languages while being
understood by cast members and audiences. Building up on an existing multilingual improv stage show
[3], we combined tele-immersion with translation to create a multilingual performance that transcends
typical physical limitations of the stage. Our paper concludes with our ongoing work: once we assemble
again in a post-pandemic world, we will keep the tele-immersion and translation tools to create
mixed-presence connected international shows.

[1] Berger, "The Forgotten Art of Assembly”, April 2020, retrieved January 2021,
https://medium.com/@nicholasberger/the-forgotten-art-of-assembly-a94e164edf0f

[2] Branch et al, “Tele-Immersive Improv”, SIG CHI 2021.

[3] Mirowski et al, “Rosetta Code: Improv in Any Language”, Computational Creativity 2020.

21

ELO 2021 - abstracts

