:
I propose to share with the ELO community, the story of the rise and fall of The Adventure Game Toolkit
(AGT), a Pascal-based design system written in 1987 by David Malmberg, based on Mark J. Welch's
1985 Generic Adventure Game System (GAGS). It was the leading platform for parser-based interactive
fiction in the late 1980s and early 1990s, with Text Adventure Development System (TADS) as its upstart
competitor. The use of these early pre-Graham Nelson’s Inform design system, parser-based interactive
fiction platforms was supported by an annual AGT contest, and a design community that stayed in touch
through BBS-communities, the largest of which was Compuserve’s Gamer’s Forum. Malmberg ceased to
support AGT in 1992, (the final release was AGT 1.7) but the contest continued until 1994, after which it

66

ELO 2021 - abstracts

was rebranded and continued on as the Interactive Fiction Competition, (which has been run since 2016
by the Interactive Fiction Technology Foundation). A game that I wrote for the AGT contest in 1992,
CosmoServe, featured a simulated DOS environment, featuring the frustrating use of dial-up software and
the aesthetic of CompuServe screens from that era, as well as the more visceral experience of BBS
communication -- wailing modems, paying by the minute, long download times and corrupt files,
hard-drive destroying viruses etc…). Ironically, this game is now all that appears to be left of
CompuServe's rich gamers’ and game designers’ lifeworld. A collaborative work that I organized, Shades
of Gray: an adventure in Black and White, written in AGT, was designed and coordinated in a
CompuServe Gamer’s Forum private room, and represents the heyday of bulletin board IF collaboration.
Ironically, when CompuServe died in the mid-1990s, after having been assimilated in a borg-like way by
its longstanding and hated rival, AOL, nothing of CompuServe remained to be archived digitally, except
what individual users might have downloaded to their own computers and backed up on floppy disks. I will
soon be launching, through IFTF, a crowdsourced “Digital Archeology” project asking old users of
CompuServe Forums (chiefly Gamers and Science Fiction forums, the two places that gamers and game
designers hung out), to go into their own basements and see what they can find of media they might have
downloaded from CompuServe in its final years. This includes transcripts of conferences, listings and files
from libraries, public postings and private email. I will share the history of AGT as a e-lit platform, its code,
games, contest, and disappearance from the scene. I’ll also give an update on the CompuServe Gamer’s
Forum Digital Archeology project, particularly as our finds shed light on the life and times of writers of
e-literature and interactive fiction who used early platforms, like GAGS, AGT, and TADS to write and
share their work, uploading and downloading it to and from BBS-services. It is a world that has vanished
from the digital record – in my paper, and presentation, I’ll try to bring some of it back.

