:
The paper describes the procedure of porting of one of the first known poetry generators in Russian from
a description of a program algorithm published as an article in the USSR Academy of Sciences:
Automatics and Telemechanics in 1978. Boris Katz, a computer linguist at MIT in the moment, and at that
moment mathematical mechanical faculty of Moscow university graduate was working on the generator in
1972 - 1975. The generator is based on Stone, 1916, the collected poems by Osip Mandelstam. This
work was inspired by his elder colleague, a professor of Moscow University, E.M.Landis. Katz started his
research on machine poetry and was asking colleagues if they knew anyone working on the theme in the
Soviet Union, and they failed to point him to similar work.

After several years of developing the program on BECM - 4 (Big Electronic Calculating Machine) he
noticed Michael Gasparov’s book Contemporary Russian verse. Metrics and rhythmics. 1974, that
analysed contemporary and traditional poetic verse and general laws of organization of Russian verse.
This made a considerable contribution to the work.

In order to understand the context in which On Program Composing Verse was produced we have to note
that unlike in other language contexts the first generated poems in Russian appeared later than musical
compositions, even though the beginnings of statistical analysis of literary texts dates back to the end of
the nineteenth century. Another component that proved necessary for the computational poetics in the
Soviet context was the study of structural properties of literary texts such as metrical analysis of Russian
verse undertaken by Vladislav Kholshevnikov, Boris Tomashevsky and Michael Gasparov. So it was
important to gain both qualitative and quantitative knowledge in regards of the properties of the poetic text
in Russian.

Porting or recreating this generator involved creation of a database in which every word of the
Mandelstam’s Stone has been classified and included into a database. The program was created by a
computer scientist Boris Katz in 1978 for BECM. A poet and computer programmer Anna Tolkacheva
used java script for porting the original program. The paper will report on the principles and choices made
during the process, as well as the mistakes made at the first iteration of the project and methods
implemented for correcting them.

