:
Tabletop Role-Playing Games (ttrpgs) are games of communal storytelling. These gameworlds exist in the
minds of players who collectively populate them with people, events, and histories. Traditionally played
in-person, groups found themselves hard hit when social-distancing rules came into effect. While some
went on hiatus, others took to the web to continue their sagas. For some, this was an uphill battle of new
technology and social norms. For others, the move was trivial as ttrpgs in fact existed online even before
the pandemic.

For this panel, we take for granted that playing ttrpgs is an act of oral literary production. We talk about
the ways this storytelling – once done cooperatively but semi-privately – has grown beyond the table
through various internet platforms to include a much larger production base. We will also cover the ways
platforms have enhanced the building aspects of ttrpgs – the building of community, worlds, and
narratives. Our panelists are as follows.

We often hide the learning process, not wanting anyone to see our vulnerability. In an attempt at
normalizing learning and imperfection, Krista-Lee Malone decided to live-stream her process of learning
to be a dungeon master (DM) on twitch.tv/gameranthro. Additionally, she hoped that by live-streaming this
she would be able to tap into the shared knowledge and experience of her audience. Although she has
been a player for over 20 years, she had never before been a DM. She began live-streaming her
preparation in January with many questions.

Casey James O’Ceallaigh was live-streaming as a DM on twitch.tv/serious_play before the pandemic. At
that time the players used a campus lab to play and stream. When the pandemic shut down campus, the
group was forced to negotiate not only how to continue the game, but also how to continue sharing the
lab channel. Previously, all streaming was done at the lab which was set up specifically for this purpose.
Suddenly, the group had to set-up across multiple computers and locations. Casey will be discussing
these negotiations and the struggles of DMing virtually while streaming.

Edword Flabberjackson is the personality behind twitch.tv/pokeyoureyesoutgames and founder of the
GCGG (Good Community, Good Games) stream team. Noticing the hard time some were having with the
current state of the world and guided by the truth that we are the stories we tell ourselves, Edword
decided to change those stories through a ttrpg stream. By having the players play both characters and

78

ELO 2021 - abstracts

themselves, he hoped to slowly get the players to start changing the stories they tell about themselves
and therefore change how they feel. He will be talking about how those stories progressed.

Andrew C. Fudge runs a ttrpg dedicated Discord server for the LGBTQ+ community. He is also preparing
a Twitch stream dedicated to diversity in D&D. He will be discussing the process of content-making and
building spaces dedicated to marginalized identities and how these spaces often become places for
players’ first “coming out” moments, an integral step for LGBTQ+ people.

