:
Last year was the year of the shift from a physical environment to the multiplicity of online space. Space
that operates on a different logic and it is measured by and clicks not metric system. One image posted
online no longer raises a question if it’s good or bad, but how it is growing with likes while our digital
avatars are categorizing them with hashtags. The online environment has no distinction between
appearance and essence, the appearance is the essence.

Computers deal in symbol strings, propositions, algorithms, and sentences, but the view that their primary
role to represent is limited. Spaces, object and people in the computer database are represented through
number modelling, visualisation charts or simulation, but these representations are not a real nature of
computer operations.

Constantly being rewritten and running complex task, code is connected to repetition that leads to
creating a sensation. Algorithmic instructions are using the logic of patterns to create rhythm and execute
tasks that are multiplying and becoming rhythms again.

The year 2020. was the year we will remember as an event of a global pandemic that shifted the world
into the environment of network, a new realm of sense where background processes of code produce
new expression and experiences. It makes us ask questions “what it means to exist as a digital avatar?”

Living exists in a webwork of entanglements and attachments, webwork that is in a continuous change
with elements of disruptions materialized in the environment.

As we communicate through different online video and conference platforms, we are no longer bounded
by physical space and time, as laws of Newtonian physics do not apply in a new realm of a networked
environment. Algorithmic processes are reshaping physical environment and our senses, what it means
to be human in a networked environment.

How does it feel to say goodbye to the loved ones through a device that is using a video platform? What
kind of relationship will emerge with technology and inner apparatus within us? Instead of drawing
conclusions and fixating on damage, I am looking for a new method and a different perspective on how to
live as a network being.

11

ELO 2021 - abstracts

Phenomenology, as a study of experience, provides the theoretical starting point for this paper, as it
allows us to inquire about the experiences of code in terms of an encounter. This paper is approaching
web network as a sensual entity with the autonomy of its own that offers a new realm of being.

