:
The interdisciplinary Science Data Center for Literature (SDC4Lit) reflects on the demands that net
literature and born-digital archival material place on archiving, research and reading. The main goal is to
implement appropriate solutions for a sustainable data lifecycle for the archive and for research purposes,
which include introductory uses at university and school level. The focus is on the establishment of
distributed long-term repositories for net literature and born-digital archival material and the development
of a research platform. The repositories will be regularly expanded by the project and its cooperation
partners and will form a hub for harvesting various forms of net literature in the future operation of
SDC4Lit. The research platform will offer the possibility of computer-assisted work with the archived
material. Since such a repository structure, which integrates collecting, archiving, and analysis, can only
be accomplished through interdisciplinary collaboration, the project brings together partners with expertise
in the subfields of archives, supercomputing, natural language processing, and digital humanities: The
German Literature Archive (Deutsches Literaturarchiv) with a focus on archiving and preservation; the
High Performance Computing Center Stuttgart (HLRS) with a focus on computing; the Institute for Natural
Language Processing and the Institute for Literary Studies at the University of Stuttgart with a focus on
NLP, cultural and literary history and digital humanities.

An important task of the project is the modeling of net literature and born-digital literature, which will
initially be carried out in an example-oriented manner in dealing with an already existing corpus of net

30

ELO 2021 - abstracts

literature and exampes from the large born-digital collection at DLA. Underlying research on both
technical and poetological challenges of digital, non-digital, and post-digital literature, e.g. on questions of
genre or on computational approaches towards net literature and literary blogs as digital and networked
objects.

In addition to digital objects and corresponding metadata, the accruing research data are also stored in a
sustainable manner. Research data includes, first, research data generated in the course of the project's
work, especially data used by regular services on the platform such as named entity recognition trained
with data from the archived material. Secondly, the repository should offer the possibility to store research
data generated by users of the research platform in a structured way and to make it available for further
research. The connection of archival repository, research platform and research data repository follows
standard research data management practices (FAIR principles) and works toward the goal to support a
sustainable research data lifecycle for archivists and researchers working with electronic literature (on the
web) and born-digital literature archived at the DLA archive and potential future cooperating institutions.

