:
We live in a world where everyone with access to technology can publish. From YouTubers to
Instagram-influencers, from gamers watching each other play online to writers self-publishing, content is
everywhere. And yet, the biggest company with its most promising title and the podcaster putting their first
episode online share the same problem: how to find an audience. Over recent years, digital technologies
have fostered the proliferation of new platforms for publishing and broadcasting, and the rise of video
streaming has further dissolved the boundaries between these two modes. Publishing no longer refers
only to words but also images, video and sound and its reach is pervasive and global.

Amplified Publishing, part of the Bristol+Bath Creative R+D project, a collaboration between four
universities in the UK is examining what publishing has come to mean across sectors, platforms and
media and explores its future direction. As a wide-scale research project, it looks at questions such as;
What does ‘publishing’ mean in the 21st Century? How will the increased availability of seamless and
synchronous visual and audio media enhance and expand traditional media, like books and magazines?
What does personalisation offer to both content creators, their publishers, and their audiences? With the
rise of visual storytelling, what is the future of reading? And, most importantly of all, who are our
audiences, where are our audiences, and what does our audience want?

This paper addresses this question of audience and seeks to understand specifically how narrative-based
digital publishing, a theme within the Amplified Publishing project, can reach an active audience across
platforms. In particular, it questions how audiences experience innovative forms and how their
experiences can be mediated and guided by writers, producers and technologists. It uses findings drawn
from an understanding of audience from electronic literature and ambient literature to draw conclusions
about the future of audiences as they experience digital published content across platforms. It reaches
beyond the Covid-19 digital landscape and seeks to understand how audiences have changed and what
they might be looking for next.

10

ELO 2021 - abstracts

