:
This research will attempt to define a new cultural and socio-economic movement we will tentatively call
‘Platformism.’ We will define Platformism as a contemporary overarching meta-narrative driven by the
networked communities and economies made possible by software apps which can be considered at
once discrete platforms, and forming part of broader ecosystems affecting almost every sphere of human
experience. By delineating and mapping Platformism as an evolving system of complex and disputed
territories, our purpose is to explore how creative practices including writing and literature can function in,
through and against the platform.

70

ELO 2021 - abstracts

Beginning with the 2020 Covid emergency travel and movement restrictions, there has been a dramatic
acceleration of the already significant mass-migration toward digital platforms. Networked platforms have
multiplied in form and function, and (according to the hyperbole of some companies offering these
services) cater to almost every aspect of human being. Many of these platforms have been proposed as
alternatives to traditional spaces for social and professional activities. Individuals, groups and
communities have experienced a kind of ‘forced experiment’ during this period as they adopted services
made possible by online and networked technologies, through computer and mobile telephony, often for
the first time.

Contemporary writers and other creative practitioners are no exception to this digital mass-migration. Not
surprisingly, many artists have embraced Platformism; its promise of new feelings through innovative
software; its claims of ‘exposure’ through access to massive user-bases; its non-stop attention/affirmation
cycles through ubiquitous always-on technologies. We will argue against accepting the platform as a
neutral, arbitrary and isolated substrate passively awaiting inscription by the user/artist. From this
perspective, an understanding of Platformism can be useful for observing and developing art and
literature in, through, and against the platform.

We will present a speculative Platformist ‘manifesto’, algorithmically generated through the statistical
analysis of a large number of ‘terms of service’ documents taken from existing software and hardware
platforms. This Platformist Manifesto resignifies the legal agreements of social media sites (such as
Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram) with hardware platforms (such as Apple, Google, Microsoft,
Playstation, and Nintendo) into a general declaration which can reveal underlying intentions, motives and
beliefs.

This generative manifesto will also reveal the metanarratives of Platformism, allowing the reader to form a
mental mindscape. These topographies may suggest the limits of the Platform, or at least offer pathways
to navigate its boundaries. Our purpose in mapping this territory is to cultivate opportunities for
commoning our struggles and priorities, to forge artistic and social positions within these topographies. To
return writing to the edge.

