:
In this interactive workshop, participants will be introduced to various platforms that can facilitate online
communication and storytelling. These platforms include our own open source tool Virtual Director,
developed in TouchDesigner, for compositing multiple participants in a shared virtual space in order to
communicate tele-immersively [1], as well as open-source creativity helpers such as an automated slide
generator [2].

The workshop will start with warm-up exercises taken from improvised comedy practice, and conclude
with short live improvised presentations made by the participants. Over the course of the workshop,
participants will learn a range of skills and best practices, derived from applied improvisation and
cinematographic language, that will help them foster a sense of presence, connection, and creativity in
digitally immersed environments.

In Part I: “Tele-Immersion with off the shelf digital tools”, participants will learn how to use OBS, Zoom,
and NDI tools to program virtual sets for live theatrical performance.

In Part II: “Virtual Director - Designing tools for improvisation”, participants will learn how to use our own
open source tool for facilitating live interactive tele-immersive performance, rehearsal, and improvisation.

In Part III: “The virtual theatre DJ/VJ: Directing ensembles in virtual spaces”, participants will engage in a
series of games and activities that demonstrate best practices for helping performers feel connected and
present with each other, facilitating physical and emotional connection through the visual language of
cinema and the pedagogy of improvisation.

About the facilitators:

Boyd Branch is the founder and director of the London-based Improvisational Media and Performance
Lab, which explores how improvisational pedagogies can be utilized to create accessible, adaptive, and
socially supportive technologies. He has been a troupe member of Improbotics since 2018. A former
Fulbright fellow, he holds an M.F.A. in interdisciplinary digital media from Arizona State University, and an
M.A. in theatre studies from the University of Utrecht in the Netherlands. He is currently a
Vice-Chancellor’s Fellow at the University of Kent.

Piotr Mirowski, a theatre actor and researcher in AI, co-founded AI-enabled improv companies
HumanMachine and Improbotics. Experimenting with AI for artistic human and machine-based

22

ELO 2021 - abstracts

co-creation, he created shows featuring robots and chatbots that have toured internationally. Piotr
obtained a PhD in computer science in 2011 at New York University as well as a Diploma in Acting at
London School of Dramatic Art (2015-2017). Piotr works as Staff Research Scientist at DeepMind on AI
research.

Kory Mathewson is a Research Scientist with DeepMind and a Machine Learning Lab Scientist with the
Creative Destruction Lab. He holds a Ph.D. in Computing Science from the University of Alberta. His
research interests include interactive machine learning, human-in-the-loop deep reinforcement learning,
human-robot interfaces, prosthetic robotics, and conversational dialogue systems. Kory is an
accomplished improvisational theatre performance artist with Rapid Fire Theatre.

[1] Branch et al, “Tele-Immersive Improv”, SIG CHI 2021.

[2] Winters and Mathewson, AutomaTED Talk Generator, https://talkgenerator.com/

