:
This paper will focus on “ambient literature” (Abba, Dovey, Pullinger 2020) as a kind of tradition-inspired
literature of the future. Thus I will propose to look critically at traditional theoretical concepts and devices
and analyse how apply them to characterise and realise such reading experiences. My starting point will
be enhancing the concept of interactional metalepsis (Bell 2016 or Bell, Ensslin and Rustad 2014), then I
will go for proposing the concept of “embedded dramatic monologue”, a form of narration built upon
tradition and useful in creating immersive ambient reading experiences.

I will focus on texts that declare: ‘Dear Reader, borrow me your body, and then I will show You my story’,
thus, I will analyse works for which the corporeal “readiness” (Gadd 2020) is conditio sine qua non of
reading, due to the fact that the reader’s body is conceptualised as an essential element of the
author-reader contract. Such reading experiences frequently lead to mashing of ontological boundaries, to
entering extradiegetic elements into diegetic world or the other way round, the phenomenon known as a
metalepsis. Although theoretical approach to metalepsis had just been amplified in the digital fiction
context (because the interactivity has opened new fields for artistic exploration of this device), ambient
literature encourages deepening that critical reflection. The concept of interactional metalepsis yet
proposed still underlies the metaphorical and symbolic dimension of the reader entering into the
storyworld, while examples of ambient literature permit talk about literal overlapping of fictional and real
world.

However, such crossing of ontological borders results in a clear need of creating a space for a reader in
the narration, narrative and storyworld.I will focus on the ways and devices used to achieve that, being
extremely interested in the form of narration that creates such space for a reader, inviting him to cross the
ontological borders. I will propose to look back at the traditional form of “dramatic monologue” (used for
the first time by A. Camus in The Fall). In context of ambient literature we frequently can and should
enhance the dramatic monologue’s theory (successfully built by i.e. M. Głowiński (Głowiński 1963)) and
talk about “embedded dramatic monologue”; The latter - build upon the interactional metalepsis and a
bleed of the storyworld into the real world of the reader (and vice versa) - does not simply simulate that in
a storyworld there is a space for the reader, who is listening to the protagonist’s monologue. It really
invites the reader to be and act in the storyworld, the storyworld that overlaps the reader’s reality. Ambient
literature often takes the form of narration that does not pretend to permit the reader to listen to the story
protagonists “as if” he was standing close to them, but “demands” that the reader really stand there.

5

ELO 2021 - abstracts

Classical locative narratives, even GPS-less ones (as Janet Cardiff’s Her Long Black Hair) and examples
from works created on creative writing courses held at the University of Lodz will be case studies used to
illustrate characterised form.

