:
Writers workshops—the lifeforce of any writing movement. Electronic literature has had its share of writing
workshops, and we’d like to revitalize that tradition. Yet electronic literature opens up dimensions of
meaning—and just as reading electronic literature becomes convoluted and complex, so too does
critiquing works in progress. Can a small, dedicated group of people be brought together to surmount
these challenges? Are there people willing to commit 5 hours of their lives to yet more meetings, as well
as homework? Probably. After all, we are crazy enough to write and deep read this stuff, so we may well
be crazy enough to share our addictions.

This engagement series would happen mostly before the ELO 2021 conference. We will provide a survey
and ask for volunteers in early February for two pods of six writers each. Each pod would have a
moderator. An introductory meeting with all pods would take place in early March, and then schedule two
pod meetings in March and April. These working sessions would allot 30 minutes per work to discuss and
react.

Pod participants (max of 12 people unless we get someone else to moderate a new pod) would gain
training in user interaction and reaction and be able to workshop their works in progress.

At the conference, a virtual engagement session with all participants would discuss what went well, what
could be improved, and how this preliminary pod approach could be extended to provide an outlet for
electronic literature creators to explore each other’s works. All ELO conference participants would discuss
ways that reacting critique techniques, user experience and interface testing, and plain old writing
workshops could help electronic literature creations.

WritePODS will provide an outlet and a voice for works in progress. It will also be ideal for newcomers to
electronic literature as this would ensure that participants will know at least the 6 others in their pod
before the conference. WRITEPODS can also spark new collaborations and creations.

DURATION OF EVENT AT THE CONFERENCE: 90 minutes, with the first 30 showcasing some of the
works, 30 minutes to discuss the pods, and 30 minutes to dream about the future.

MAXIMUM NUMBER OF PARTICIPANTS: 12 in the pods (unless someone else volunteers as a
moderator for another pod) and unlimited in the conference event.

43

ELO 2021 - abstracts

