:
Rockstar Games’ 2018 critical and commercial darling Red Dead Redemption 2 (RDR2) follows outlaw
Arthur Morgan as he and the other members of the Van der Linde gang try to outrun the law, rival gangs,
and looming twentieth-century industrialization in a fictionalized version of the American West. Like its
predecessor, Red Dead Redemption (2010), the single player campaign mostly focuses on how men
relate to other men, though RDR2 does attempt to add greater diversity to the women Arthur meets in the
game’s numerous scripted and randomly occurring encounters. While the previous game gave players an
achievement for binding and murdering a woman via train in the style of Rocky and Bullwinkle’s Snidely
Whiplash, RDR2 more critically approaches what it means to make an interactive depiction of a world
where women’s career options were “split evenly between being a teacher, a nurse or a prostitute” (“Rape
a Problem in Old West; Still is Today” n.p., 2010). The women of RDR2 are singers, farmers, heiresses,
mothers, gunslingers, scientists, and suffragettes. While the game’s open world often leaves it up to the
player to determine how to interact with the characters that populate it—and this “freedom” has resulted in
numerous popular videos of players brutalizing suffragettes—Red Dead Redemption 2 most often dwells
on encounters that ask Arthur Morgan (and the player) to consider the purpose and cost of the violence
he witnesses and commits.

Among the many optional side-missions and unnamed “moments” in the game, Red Dead Redemption 2
includes a brief but chilling encounter with a stranger living in the swamplands of Lemoyne, RDR2’s
answer to New Orleans, where Arthur is removed from the player’s control, knocked unconscious,
sexually assaulted, and left in a different part of the game map. After a muttered “oh my lord” and a
bowlegged first few steps, the game resumes with minimal additional commentary. In a culture and
medium where male sexual victimization is rarely discussed and rape-revenge narratives are defined by
centering rape as the “core action” that motivates the main character (Projansky in Heller-Nicholas 4,
2011), the incident destabilizes our traditional relationship with gender performance, player control, and
goal-oriented game design. My paper will explore the effects of creating an incident of rape, what it
means to encode that sexual assault on a masculine body in a game decorated with the familiar
iconography of the traditionally masculine Western genre, and how the open-ended encounter affects the
player’s ability to seek catharsis, revenge, or redemption following Arthur’s rape. In particular, I will
examine how the playability and incidental nature of the event moves beyond the familiar trappings of the
rape-revenge narrative, and how the player’s response(s) continues to negotiate the game’s overarching
questions about violence, power, and control.

77

ELO 2021 - abstracts

