:
Queer/Femme Internet Aesthetics

This fun, playful, one-hour workshop is primarily intended for participants identified as women, femme,
nonbinary, trans, and/or queer. However, anyone is welcome to attend.

Queer femme* internet aesthetics often intentionally subvert minimalist design principles and usability
heuristics, making the user aware of the platform/medium rather than concealing it.

In this workshop, we’ll first explore how and why net artists, writers, and designers like Petra Cortright,
Olia Lialina, Marisa Olson, Momo Pixel, and Sam Cohen and Sandra Rosales break “good design” rules
and embrace a Web 1.0 aesthetic.

Then, we’ll experience digital femme history and culture firsthand through the embodied limitations and
affordances of using web 1.0 technology. Participants will make an old-fashioned glitter GIF. Since the
Blingee platform requires an account, we’ll use the open-access platform GlitterPhoto
(https://www.glitterphoto.net/), developed in 2003. Although the 1.0 Blingee aesthetics are echoed in
contemporary Instagram and Snapchat stickers, we’ll use one of the “original” platforms, clunky by our
current standards, to experience not only the aesthetics but also the tools and techniques inherent to the
platform that enabled those aesthetics.

This workshop builds on the “Queer & Femme Digital Literature” panel that I chaired at AWP 2020,
featuring Sarah Ciston, Sam Cohen, Kate Durbin, Feliz Lucia Molina, and Sandra Rosales
(https://www.awpwriter.org/awp_conference/event_detail/17596).

* I conceptualize a queer femme aesthetic like a hyper-saturated, self-conscious, postmodern,
performative femininity. Glitter, sequins, lip gloss, nail polish, dELiA*s magazine, ‘90s neon pink and slime
green. Digitally, I think the queer femme aesthetic was innovated in spaces like Tumblr and MySpace,
with tools like Blingee and Angelfire Dollz. Kate Durbin’s Tumblr project Women as Objects archives teen
girls’ labor in shaping early internet aesthetics, and Sam Cohen and Sandra Rosales’ publishing project
Yes Femmes tracks the contemporary development of this aesthetic in a literary context. Of course, there
is no one definition of a queer femme digital aesthetic, though I’d argue that the nail polish emoji is pretty

75

ELO 2021 - abstracts

key!

