:
In the manner of a Kuhn, Marx or Nietzsche, I will look at the dialogue between cultural and material
historical circumstance, how legitimated knowledge feeds back and forth into and out of its social context.
Each economic basis provides a new material platform out of which culture grows, and against which it is
reminded of its paradigmatic forebear.

50

ELO 2021 - abstracts

I will look at four different historical moments in science and technology and the cultural qualities that
coincided. In each section I will look at the paradigm these thinkers and makers bring about, and then
consider how well this view is illuminated by artistic examples in the medium. Perhaps only the first will be
conventionally recognizable as electronic or media-oriented literature as it will concern the relation of
cultural creation to computers. Further, only it may bear the resemblance of providing protocol platforms
in its engagement - yet it will be my contention that this idea materially defined will extend historically and
benefit from that analytical standpoint. Video technology will be considered next, from its scientific origins
to its manifestation today from dvds and theatres to file types within streaming services. Next will be
electricity itself followed by print technology. A material ecological view will be proposed that orients
platform engagement and literary forms around the historical and extended physical properties of given
media used in terms of cultural expression. From this view, the extremely virtualized notion of platform
and its mildly divergent notion of different social media brands, becomes a timely contemporary symptom.
To deconstruct this will be to reveal the ailing social environment behind capitalism, computer networks
and their alien social spheres.

Lovelace, Carroll and Von Neuman: The Logic of Machines does not need Machines

Ada Lovelace set the social and conceptual model - how software and the abstract machine make up the
future. In Carroll we discover the committed logician who perhaps like no other applied this same rigour to
the creation of narrative both intense and fantastic and yet thoroughly rational. Von Neumann formalizes
abstraction and returns it to the space of statecraft, the sociopolitical forming of an engineered world.

Edison, Melies and Muybridge: Time Documentation and the Privilege of Visual Coherence

What for Muybridge extends the tools of science and re-analysis, for Edison is a vehicle of narrative and
commerce, for Melies of magic.

Franklin, Priestley and Shelley: Resurrection, The Law of the Lightning Rod

Where Priestley contributes to the refining of electromagnetic law, Franklin produces technology of new
utility, Shelley stories of new cultural force.

Cavendish, Cervantes and Copernicus: Printing Novel Essays and a New Cosmogony

The repetition of romance makes Cervantes mock-epic novel the day's prescription, while Copernicus
takes the mountains of astronomical data avaiable in the name of a radicalized universal picture,
Cavendish finds expertise in both, culminating in work in materialist philosophy, scientific poetry and
pioneering science fiction.

51

ELO 2021 - abstracts

