:
The formal patterns of the codex book remain evident in literary forms no longer bound by the material
efficiencies of the paper platform. For some works, like Judd Nelson's "The Jew's Daughter" or Jason
Nelson's "Evidence of Everything Exploding," the printed page becomes a platform for the mutability of
the screen, while others like Amaranth Borsuk and Brad Bouse's _Between Page and Screen_ or Steve
Tomosula's _VAS: An Opera in Flatland_ explore the tension between the printed and the projected word.

Still other electronic works embrace the physical material of a bound, published book as their final form,,
and in this paper, I propose a framework for considering the differences among computer-generated
books relative to their characteristics and apparent purposes. By articulating three broad genres, I attempt
to draw in more diverse networks of influence that bear on the present moment.

122

ELO 2021 - abstracts

Works that are metonymic are sculptural in their appeal to bookishness (after Jessica Pressman's)
through the fact of their material existence. These works include Luigi Amato and Roberto Arista's
_Volume_, which includes as its contents its literal self-description (in terms of weight, width, height,
indexicality) and Jean Keller's 2012 _The Black Book_, which maximizes the value of a self-printed book
by printing each page in solid black. The role of computation in the creation of these works is at least
implied, and their status as metonyms for the concrete visibility of books draws in other works with
different origins.

Computer-generated books may follow or invent many different literary genres, although poetry is a more
forgiving milieu than prose. The books that I propose to call "generic" are those whose function is
contingent upon a specific work or style. The methods programmers use may be stochastic, deterministic,
or statistical, but they each begin with a specific work or works and rely for their significance on readers
recognize the work being satirized. This includes the many methods following the tradition of Hugh
Kenner and Joseph O'Rourke's "Travesty Generator."

Finally, works that I consider "operationalist" follow Neil Harris's identification of P.T. Barnum's method of
showmanship as demonstrating an "operational aesthetic." For these books, the audience is to some
extent left with some doubt as to the origin of the book, and this may include books where readers have
some reason to doubt whether it was really generated by a computer program and books that have
attempted to "pass" as human-authored. In either case, the operations of authorship are among the
principle signifying characteristics of these works.

The typology I have proposed and will develop in this paper is broad, and many computer-generated
books may have features consistent with two or more of the types I have specified here. But given the
wide range and long history of books co-authored by computational processes, this attempt at a
framework for describing their purposes and audiences helps connect these works of electronic literature
to adjacent fields such as conceptual writing, literary hoaxes, and artist's books.

123

