:
A primary interface pattern of contemporary software platforms is the infinite scroll. Often used to deliver
algorithmically-selected personalized content, infinitely scrolling feeds are one of many design decisions
seen as responsible for compulsive use of social media platforms and other information-rich sites and
apps. During the COVID-19 pandemic, a time marked by a substantive increase in time spent online, the
infinitely scrolling feed has been implicated in a new negative pattern: “doomscrolling.” Doomscrolling
refers to the ways in which people find themselves regularly--and in some cases, almost
involuntarily--scrolling bad news headlines on their phone, often for hours each night in bed when they
had meant to be sleeping. While the realities of the pandemic have necessitated a level of vigilance for
the purposes of personal safety, doomscrolling isn’t just a natural reaction to the news of the day—it’s the
result of a perfect yet evil marriage between a populace stuck online, social media interfaces designed to
game and hold our attention, and the realities of an existential global crisis. It may be hard to look away
from bad news in any format, but it’s nearly impossible to avert our eyes when that news is endlessly

19

ELO 2021 - abstracts

presented via designed-to-be-addictive social media interfaces that know just what to show us next in
order to keep us “engaged.” As an alternative interface, the author’s artwork, titled The Endless
Doomscroller, acts as a lens on our software-enabled collective descent into despair. By distilling the
news and social media sites down to their barest most generalized phrases and interface conventions,
The Endless Doomscroller shows us the mechanism that’s behind our scroll-induced anxiety:
interfaces—and corporations—that always want more. More doom (bad news headlines) compels more
engagement (via continued liking/sharing/posting) which produces more personal data, thus making
possible ever more profit. Using concepts from Christian Ulrik Andersen’s and Søren Pold’s
Metainterface, Taina Bucher’s analyses of algorithmic politics, Geert Lovink’s theories of how sadness
gets coded into platforms, and Matthew Fuller’s software studies guidance to perform deep analyses of
small computational things, this paper will examine how the infinite scroll has intersected with
pandemic-era platforms to create a world full of unhappy and unrelenting doomscrollers. Why don’t users
look away from the scroll? Who most benefits when they can’t stop? And how might text-focused digital
artworks intervene? Can an artwork that asks users to read *more* bad news headlines create an
opportunity for mindfulness or enable a sort of exposure or substitution therapy, a way to escape or
replace what platform interfaces want from and do to us? What if, in this age of pandemic platforms, the
only way out of too much doomscrolling is endless doomscrolling?

