:
We propose this panel around the question of how digital platforms have played the role of the classical
panopticon during the COVID-19 pandemic. Our research draws from our existing project The Digital
Pandemic (thedigitalpandemic.com), which we started in the summer of 2020, to investigate the
specificities of the COVID-19 as the first pandemic of the digital era. For this ELO Panel we focus
exclusively on one aspect of our research: the dispersal of surveillance tactics through digital platforms
during the current pandemic.

From its very classical formulation, surveillance is a platformed event: an all-seeing eye on a raised dais.
While the digital challenges erstwhile notions of architecturally fixed surveillance, tracking its users
environmentally, it nevertheless subsists on digital platforms as interfaces or daises upon which user
information can be extracted. In this view of the digital, we explore how the panopticon, as an abstract
platform, has proliferated in different concrete shapes during the COVID-19 pandemic. Each of our three
project members (and panelists) focuses on separate case studies of this dispersal of surveillance with
close attention to the aesthetics and politics of digital platforms. Maile Young’s paper (“Public Health,
Private Platform”) studies the platforms and interfaces of COVID-19 testing to explore how they represent
and reproduce the failing health care system of the US. She shows how the crisis of America’s healthcare
system is exacerbated by potential dangers of medical data leaks and monetization. Pujita Guha’s paper
("Red for Caution") studies the optical aspect of the panoptics through an examination of the color
schemes in contact tracing apps such as China’s Alipay and India’s Arogya Setu. She shows how the use
of color for pandemic visualization owes its origin to the redlining of American cities and thus reproduces
tactics of racial profiling, containment, surveillance and control. Finally, Suroit Kayal’s presentation
(“Platform Infrastructures of Protest Emergence”) explores the platform based digital infrastructure behind

115

ELO 2021 - abstracts

the emergence of protest movements during the pandemic such as the BLM and the ongoing Farmers’
Movement in India. His presentation shows how the unavailability of other means and spaces such as the
street ensured that digital platforms play a more significant role for both the coordination among
protesters (for example, through the use of social media and chatting apps to google docs) and its
containment through strategies of data gathering, analysis and tracking. In conversation, we will show
how pandemic platforms have enabled and transformed surveillance technology to speculate on the
futures of COVID-19 digital environments in the aftermath of disease.

