:
Larps are a form of analog game in which participants co-create and collectively inhabit diegeses
(Montola 2012). Larp may also be thought of as a medium, and codic larps are a type of larp platform that
use diegetic code (Steele 2016) to represent parts of the story, allowing conflicts about what happens
next to be resolved through contests in which diegetic material has been congealed into code and
rendered deployable. Codic larps offer a unique opportunity to teach and study code, and the analog
nature of codic larp allows advanced engagements like platform modding to happen with fewer layers of
technology to navigate than digital code platforms, ostensibly lowering the barrier of entry to coding, while
allowing diegetic code to serve as a "boundary object" (Star 1999) through which scholars and
professionals from many backgrounds may develop common language to engage in cross-codic critique.

Recently, activities including as codic larps have come under scrutiny by those who question the power
relations inherent in physically embodying one’s own avatar, as well as in rituals surrounding the
embodied deployment of diegetic code. After developing and touring their digital Shakespeare game,
_Play the Knave_, Gina Bloom, Nicholas Toothman, and Evan Buswell have recently argued that having
players physically embody their characters is troubled by the degree to which out-of-game asymmetrical
power relations like racisms and sexisms attach themselves to bodies (Bloom et al. 2021), an issue that is
part of a phenomenon that might be called out-of-game creep. Additionally, sociologist Steven Dashiell
has criticized rituals that often surround code-based analog gaming for reinforcing structural forms of
sexism and other inequalities (2017, 2020), fueling arguments within larp communities that diegetic code
deployment should be removed from games altogether (cf. Fatland et al. 1999). Seeming to push back
against these sentiments is the work of other gamemaker-scholars who have engaged larp's embodiment
and rituals of code deployment to ostensibly develop interventions into pervasive forms of systemic
inequality. Jonaya Kemper's work on emancipatory bleed (2018), Diana Shipley's efforts to develop
anti-racist scaffolding for codic larp (2021), as well as the work I have done on anti-code (2018), and the
efforts to develop larp consent mechanics by Johanna Koljonen (2016), Sarah Lynne Bowman (2017),
and Maury Brown (2017), demonstrate efforts to not only salvage different facets of the larp medium, but
to "fork the code," using the larp medium's unique embodimemt and of code-based play to offer game
mechanics and scaffolding as interventions into systemic racisms and sexisms.

109

ELO 2021 - abstracts

