:

This paper outlines public archives of electronic literature authoring tools and technologies via git version
control as a platform for decentralized organization, with a specific focus on current and proposed future
uses of the GitHub platforms. How are the source code and tooling for creating electronic literature
maintained currently preserved through public open source, and how might ELO initiatives and
community best practices engage with them in the future?

Throughout its history electronic literature has been been widely varied and proliferated in many ways:
varied in forms or artifacts that are experimental or avant-garde in themselves, varied in modes of
distribution across various platforms (including popular and experimental forms), and varied in the
authoring tools and techniques used to create it. This proliferation and continual engagement with the
*now* of rapid technological change is by its nature usually attached to relatively ephemeral software and
hardware forms, whether StorySpace, Flash, the Nintendo DS, et cetera. As most electronic literary works
are therefor by default ephemera, a long-held core mission of electronic literature communities of practice
has been the preservation, archiving, and dissemination of electronic literature works. A survey briefly
considers the context of many existing initiatives to catalog and archive such works -- in particular, the

62

ELO 2021 - abstracts

examples of the ELMCIP Electronic Literature Knowledge Base (https://elmcip.net/), the CELL Search
Engine (https://cellproject.net/), and IFDB: the Interactive Fiction Database (https://ifdb.tads.org/). As the
CELL project describes it: "To the degree that inclusion in a database is now the publishing event and the
life of a literary work is defined through a trail of linked commentaries and active responses, the gathering
and identification of works becomes itself a creative and scholarly activity." Currently these database
catalogs tend to be primarily artifact-centric -- focused primarily on preserving a "work" -- rather than
tool-centric or platform-centric, focused on preserving a practice, craft, or creative mode.

By contrast, several electronic literature authoring communities of practice are organized around
particular genres or platforms -- for example, hypertext authors using Twine, IF authors using Inform, or
bot authors using Tracery -- make extensive use of open source repositories and hosts such as GitHub in
order to develop and disseminate authoring tools, platforms, libraries, and plugins et cetera for electronic
literature authoring. These tend to be decentralized, supported by small numbers of self-hosting
developers who are addressing to specific active communities of practice in their own terms. One
practical consequence of this is tagging: umbrella terms such as "electronic literature" or "elit" are almost
unknown in GitHub repository tags.

The paper concludes by putting forward a model for a public open source archive for electronic literature
tool and platform source code, based on cataloging and mirroring a collection of forks of existing code
bases drawn from across multiple electronic literature authoring communities. It is modeled on a related
project in the area of creative computing, the Archive for Processing initiative
(https://github.com/archive-for-processing/archive-for-processing).

