:

Our lives unfold within an interstitial zone between digital platforms and physical sites, yet our laws and
courts are geared towards regulation of meatspace practices. This text seeks to explore the potentials of
communal practices of electronic writing in creating new forms of law able to deal with our contemporary
reality in a more adequate and creative fashion.

Enthusiastic hacker culture once pronounced cyberspace as a politically independent entity. The sphere
of the digital emerged as a model of post-political communal life, free from the infractions of corporations
and the nation state. Within this regime all power rests with the hacker as creative individual - "Code is

94

ELO 2021 - abstracts

law", the legal apparatus becomes identical with technical machinery. It is a fluid form of regulation,
readily available to processes of patching, tinkering, substitution, and creative subversion.

In the face of monopolistic platform capitalism, these promises now ring hollow. Code may be law, but
users do not have access to it - it is hackable no more. Meatspace law presents itself as outdated and
repressive, its enforcement is slow and cumbersome. Content filters act instantaneous, yet their
legitimacy remains dubious.

Despite perceptions of an anarchic digital space, online platforms such as social networks are in fact
highly regulated. Every signifier within the logic of the platform is constantly appraised on the basis of its
economic merits.

Life within the interstitial space of online and offline activity thus oscillates between a sense of repression
and lawlessness. There is no constitution of cyberspace while social networks appear to have revoked
the social contract.

Perhaps, the notion of an "algorithmic" social contract (Rahwan, 2018) holds interesting potential
regarding the communal regulation of our hybrid realities. Originating from discourse surrounding the
problematic of ethical AI, the notion of the algorithmic social contract situates itself at the crossroads of
legal and technical infrastructure.

Thus it holds the potential of creating hybrid forms of social regulation, neither enforced through a
traditional legal system nor subscribing to the doctrine of "code is law".

How could these electronic constitutions look like?

How would we write them?

I argue here that the practice of electronic writing offers unique potentials for creation of documents able
to regulate the hybrid space consisting of digital and physical subjects.

Intelligible to humans and machines alike, they would have to move the passions of carbon-based
subjects while informing the decisions of silicone based cognition.

References
Rahwan, I. (2018). Society-in-the-loop: programming the algorithmic social contract. Ethics and
Information Technology, 20(1), 5-14.
Lessig, L. (2009). Code: And other laws of cyberspace.

95

ELO 2021 - abstracts

