:
This paper explores work by Australian net.artist and game designer Mez Breeze. In 2020, Breeze’s VR
and XR creations were shortlisted for the Woollahra Digital Literary Award. In 2019 she won Queensland
University of Technology’s Digital Literature Award for her Virtual Reality Microstories Series V[R]ignettes,
and received the Marjorie C. Luesebrink Career Achievement Award as a visionary artist. In 2018,
another of her VR Literature experiences was shortlisted for the If:book New Media Writing Prize. Also in
2018, Mez Breeze collaborated with Microsoft, Samsung and MasterpieceVR in their VR Influencers
Sustainability Initiative. These are only some of her achievements. She currently serves as an Advisor to

18

ELO 2021 - abstracts

the Mixed Augmented Reality Art Research Organisation and is a Senior Research Affiliate of the
Humanities and Critical Code Studies Lab, among other responsibilities.

V[R]erses is a collection of 3D online experiences of X-Reality -virtual, mixed, and augmented- created by
Mez Breeze in collaboration with other well-known E-lit artists. In this paper, I argue that this work
inquiries into the posthuman scenario, that is, on the impact of human and nonhuman actions in the
Anthropocene.

In the case of electronic literature and net.art, a central concern has been the role of software, considered
by some a sort of disembodied haunting voice of the ghost in the machine. In “Theory as Praxis: The
poetics of Electronic Textuality” (2002), Johanna Drucker, turned to Jerome McGann’s Radiant Textuality
to assert that the Aristotelian’s concept of “poïesis”, nowadays conceptualized only as theory was, in its
ancient Greek original meaning, a form of making or craft (see also López-Varela 2017). According to
Drucker, “Making things … pushes the horizons of one’s understanding.” (2002: 684) Decades later, there
is still the need to call attention to the practical aspects of Humanities disciplines. The aims of this paper
are multiple. It attempts to show how art and, in this case, Mez Breeze’s net.art, foregrounds
contemporary problems such as the possible agency of nonhuman actants. It also calls for a blend of
STEM disciplines into STE[A]M in order to highlight the 4E consilience of all knowledge.

