:
‘In a strict sense, I don't believe there's any definition of poetry that applies to all poets. Different poets
have different goals. Different poets have different things in their hearts that they’re trying to express in
different ways that they want to express them. Are my videos where I'm running around in the woods
talking about YOLO and dogs and dads – are these really poetry? Why call them poetry?’

These are the words of Steve Roggenbuck (https://www.youtube.com/user/steveroggenbuck), a
twenty-something self-proclaimed video artist and poet who released YouTube videos from 2010 to 2017.
Roggenbuck’s video poems comprised clips of his stream of consciousness, often filmed while he rolled
in the grass or ran through natural scenes, screaming. Amongst random - and, frankly, weird - comments,
Roggenbuck inserted motivational moments urging viewers to appreciate nature and follow their dreams.
Many videos have been edited to include musical accompaniment, green screen-facilitated backgrounds,
and/or additional graphics.

Over seven years, Roggenbuck’s fanbase grew larger and more devoted, with Roggenbuck being
established as one of the alt-lit (alternative literature) movement’s most renowned contributors. In October
2018, though, Roggenbuck’s fans turned their backs to him as he confirmed allegations of sexual
misconduct: allegations that followed numerous others made against alt-lit contributors.

There are, to be sure, many Internet and alt-lit poets. Roggenbuck makes for a particularly interesting
case study because he embodies various facets of Internet culture: visual and aural disjointedness,
conscious contempt for grammatical correctness (a poetic license, so to speak), premeditated
performance of personality, and – as he has confirmed – sexual harassment brought to light in the
#MeToo moment. His online persona embodies the complexities of human connection in an increasingly

83

ELO 2021 - abstracts

digital context. Rather ironically, though, most of his videos aim to ignite viewers’ passion for the natural
world. ‘Worms! Worms! Worms!’ he excitedly screams as he runs through a desert in one video. ‘Fucking
llamas! Llamas! Whales are so big!’

This paper introduces readers to Roggenbuck’s poetry, and explores its place within poetic traditions by
highlighting the distinctive stylistic features of his work. It considers how Roggenbuck’s video poetry
represents a kind of electronic literature that both reflects and parodies meme culture for young adult
viewers less inclined to engage with poetry in printed form. This paper also considers how the allegations
against Roggenbuck impact interpretations of his work. It aims to start a conversation about negotiating
literary value and socially unacceptable authorial behavior on digital platforms with new expectations and
potential issues. To use Roggenbuck’s own words: ‘I am the bard. I am the poet. And to be a poet while
the Internet exists. Man, we got an opportunity.’ The ‘opportunity’ offered by the Internet allowed
Roggenbuck to rise to fame. It was also his demise.

*Note: A version of this paper was submitted/accepted to last year's ELO conference, but I was unable to
present. This work has not been presented/published anywhere, but I continue to work on it (it's changed
a lot in the last year!).

