:
Some say that our relationship with time has changed. The "new management", in companies and

111

ELO 2021 - abstracts

administrations, is believed to lead to an ever greater and more stressful feeling of urgency. The Covid 19
crisis has undoubtedly further accentuated this trend, with one feeling compelled to be ever more
connected (primarily to major platforms) and to respond immediately and at all times to digital requests.

According to Paul Ricoeur, "a story is significant insofar as it outlines the features of temporal experience"
(Ricoeur, 1985). To what extent do the forms of digital literary narratives that can be observed today
express a certain relationship to temporality? Are new ways of working, of organizing society (mobility,
network, collaboration) and a new relationship to temporality (acceleration of time, immediacy, lifestyle
events) likely to lead to other forms of narratives?

We will study three different forms of digital narratives – each time relying on a specific example – in order
to understand what the Digital (and platformization) may change in the relationship between narratives
and temporality.

We will first focus on a notification-based smartphone fiction (downloadable from an application platform),
in which the fictional character regularly sends notifications to the reader. This type of story is based on a
play with temporality via the intrusion of reality, of the reader's real time.

We will also analyze a narrative on the web based on a real-time data flow. The greatest limitation
imposed on the narrative by this type of dimension is that the causal sequence is replaced by the
sequentiality of real events. But this technical specificity of being based on a real-time data flow brings the
contingency of life into the narrative, and leads to a “pure temporal experience” (Chambefort, 2020).

Finally, we will look at a collective narrative on a social network platform, the temporality of which
depends on the activity of the contributors but is also "in direct contact with the passage of time"
(Saemmer, 2018).

Do these forms of narratives help us cope with another relationship to temporality? Indeed, if we follow
Ricoeur, "time becomes human insofar as it is articulated in a narrative way"…

References:
- Bouchardon, S. (2019). “Mind the gap! 10 gaps for digital literature?”, Electronic Book Review,
http://electronicbookreview.com/essay/mind-the-gap-10-gaps-for-digital-literature/
- Chambefort, F. (2020). "Sortir de l’écran : Lucette, Gare de Clichy". In Gervais, B. and Marcotte, S.
(eds.), Attention à la marche ! Penser la littérature électronique en culture numérique. Montreal: Les
Presses de l’Écureuil - ALN/NT2. pp. 327 338. ISBN 979-10-384-0004-7.
- Ricoeur, P. (1985). Temps et récit, 3 vol., Paris: Seuil.
- Saemmer, A. (2018). "Bienvenue dans la Colonie", Conference "Art, littérature et réseaux sociaux",
Cerisy-la-Salle,
https://art-et-reseaux.fr/bienvenue-dans-la-colonie-%E2%80%A8enjeux-de-limperialisme-algorithmique-et
-tentatives-dinsurrection/

112

ELO 2021 - abstracts

