:
The forced confinement due to the Covid-19 pandemic has been framed as a condition from which to
reassess modern life's habits and values, and build upon such reassessment in order to reimagine a
more sustainable and equitable future. A ubiquitous feature of such confinement has been the transition
from physical/presential modes of expression and interaction to virtual ones, typically supported through
electronic platforms. In the current conditions of physical distancing and confinement, electronic-platform
culture presents a tension between two opposite but coexisting aspects – isolation and connectedness –
both of which it seems to amplify: the former through its implication of physical distance, the latter through
its global reach. My poster will offer a reflection on today's recourse to electronic platforms under
conditions of physical confinement in light of physiological evidence and philosophical ideas, in particular
the work of ancient Chinese thinker Zhuang Zhou (369-286 BC).

A prominent feature of Zhuang Zhou's thought is the emphasis on contemplation and spontaneity as
vehicles for the achievement of virtue and wisdom. In his writings, Zhuang Zhou maintains that 'the
perfect man does nothing [...] In the hope of attaining, by contemplation, a like spontaneity'. Zhuang
Zhou's emphasis on wisdom as spontaneity (as opposed to deliberate action) echoes Aristotle's (384-322
BC) account of virtue as acquired through automatic habit (as opposed to wilful effort). Similarly, Zhuang
Zhou's emphasis on spontaneity and automaticity resonates with the prominent role of involuntary
mechanisms in human physiology, as in the autonomic nervous system, which ensures human survival
through unconscious, automatic processes.

Zhuang Zhou's stress on the link between virtue and spontaneity continues to be relevant today, as its
emphasis on the pursuit of contemplation and inactivity challenges the intuitive understanding of the
human individual as defined by conscious, deliberate, and wilful choices, and highlights instead the
centrality of unconscious, non-deliberate, and automatic physiological mechanisms that largely regulate
human survival. Furthermore, Zhuang Zhou's emphasis on the pursuit of contemplation and inactivity as
the path to wisdom resonates with sections of the rhetoric permeating the discourse around the current
pandemic-related forced confinement. Building on my dual training in literature and neuroscience, I will

6

ELO 2021 - abstracts

bring Zhuang Zhou's theory of spontaneity and inactivity into dialogue with physiological mechanisms, as
they relate to the use of electronic platforms under conditions of confinement. By pitting Zhuang Zhou's
intuitions against Aristotle's theory and today's state of affairs my poster will use the current
pandemic-related platform-based culture as a pivot to draw conceptual bridges between ideas spanning
millennia and continents. This confrontation will also prompt reflection on ways in which the specific
circumstances of the current pandemic affected the production of – and the cultural practices surrounding
– electronic literature, as well as how literature may in turn orientate the ways in which the specific
circumstances of the pandemic are framed and experienced. My goal is offer a tradition-rooted yet timely
and forward-looking reflection that might prompt fresh utopian (and perhaps also dystopian) perspectives
on the world's current predicament.

