:
Beyond Maximalism: Resolving the Novelistic Incompatibilities of Realism, Paranoia, Omniscience, and
Encyclopedism through Electronic Literature.

In The Maximalist Novel, Ercolino defines a type of novel that displays multiform maximizing and
hypertrophic tension. He lists Pynchon’s Gravity’s Rainbow (1973) and Mason & Dixon (1997), Wallace’s
Infinite Jest (1996), DeLillo’s Underworld (1997), Smith’s White Teeth (2000), Franzen’s The Corrections
(2001), and Bolaño’s 2666 (2004) as examples of the term, and classifies the maximalist novel using ten
elements: length, encyclopedic mode, dissonant chorality, diegetic exuberance, completeness, narratorial
omniscience, paranoid imagination, intersemioticity, ethical commitment, and hybrid realism. While
Ercolino’s ten elements accurately identify and classify a significant novel form that has emerged, I argue
that these elements are incompatible with one another, which has resulted in criticisms of maximalist
novels, as well as a number of maximalist novelists to abandon the form. While Ercolino argues that these
incompatibilities represent an ‘internal dialectic’ of the genre, I argue that this is too conflicting to be stable
as a novelistic form. These incompatibilities include the incompatibility of multiple (hybrid) realisms, the
incompatibility of paranoid imagination with ethical commitment, and the incompatibilities of narratorial
omniscience and an encyclopedic mode with a persuasive realism. By examining contemporary fictional
works written by previously maximalist novelists, I reassess Ercolino’s ten elements in order to identify the
reasons why certain authors have moved beyond the limits of his definition. In so doing, I compare and
contrast Ercolino’s ‘maximalist novel’ with Woods’s ‘hysterical realism,’ and Johnston’s ‘novel of
information multiplicity.’ Using the Franzen and Smith corpuses as examples, this paper speculates on the
future form of the novel as it progresses into the 21st Century. From this literary interrogation, I apply
these conclusions to my digital creative practice by developing the digital novel The Perfect Democracy
(funded by the Australia Council for the Arts). This work takes as its subject the entire population of
contemporary Australia. Such a vast subject is impossible to represent in a work of fiction. The whole
work is presented as a 3D frame-like artefact, that can be navigated as a whole, allowing readers to be
presented with a multivalent, broad-canvas novel, while resolving the paradoxical issues identified in my
interrogation of Ercolino. I propose that this will be achieved by utilising Calvino’s Six Memos. Images of
Australian currency will be used as a structural device to remove weight by representing the whole society
from the richest to the poorest in the quickest way possible, and a multitude of simultaneous digital writing
formats and voices will be used to precisely depict characterisation.

41

ELO 2021 - abstracts

Works Cited

Calvino, I. (1988) Six Memos For The Next Millennium, trans. P. Creagh, London: Vintage, 1988.

Johnston, J. (1998) Information Multiplicity: American Fiction in the Age of Media Saturation, Baltimore:
The Johns Hopkins University Press.

Smith, Z. (2001) ‘This is how it feels to me’, The Guardian. Retrieved from
https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/oct/13/fiction.afghanistan (accessed 18 November, 2018).

Wood, J. (2001) ‘Human, All Too Inhuman’, The New Republic Online. Retrieved from
https://newrepublic.com/article/61361/human-inhuman (accessed 18 November, 2018).

