:
Reviewing the history of computing, the educational potential of new ways of knowledge representation
and new literary affordances have sparked many influential ideas and reform efforts, spanning from
"frantic systems" (Nelson, 1970) to constructionist discovery learning (Papert, 1993) to the reconfiguration
of literary education (Landow, 2006, ch. 7). Yet, the current usages of electronic literature in education
arguably fall behind those early anticipations. Therefore, this paper explores the wider educational and
social entanglements that withhold electronic literature from entering classrooms in the context of current
technology transformations.

Considering the recent pandemic-related global upsurge of the digitalization of educational systems, the
mere lack of supply of digital devices and equipment will cease to be the main obstacle for the adoption of
electronic literature in K12 classrooms. Nonetheless, the question shifts to what imaginaries and
discourses shape (and limit) the use of new digital literary affordances. Reviewing current trends, three
issues are identified. These concern (1) a focus on technological disruption, (2) problematizing learning
objectives and (3) the marginalization of teaching.

The focus on technological disruption (and solutionism) refers to a tendency for innovators to overly
emphasize particular technological aspects and to become fixated on their "disruptive" benefits while
disregarding the need for cultural and artistic conventions and communities of education practices to grow
within the digital medium.

Secondly, the problematization of learning objectives relates to a prioritization of basic skills and 21st
century workforce preparation while neglecting the need to address new critical literacy practices.
Moreover, reading researchers have expressed concerns about the erosion of deep reading within digital
media (E-Read, 2019). Rather than responding with a restricted, preservationist stance limited to
paper-based literacy, educators and authors may find ways of combining material affordances and
electronic literature to introduce wider literacy conceptions in educational practice.

In a similar vein, the marginalization of teaching is concerned with how technology is being used to
quantify, classify and control teaching practices within new regimes of digital governance. In other words,
teachers are being increasingly framed as technicians and behavioral managers in place of enhancing
their role as "cyberbards" (Murray, 2016) or "narrative architects" (Jenkins, 2004).

97

ELO 2021 - abstracts

Given that some of the issues raised correspond to known problems in the field of electronic literature,
they also provide opportunities for further transdisciplinary research into the production and adaptation of
electronic literature for educational purposes.

References
E-Read. (2019). Cost e-read stavanger declaration concerning the future of reading
https://ereadcost.eu/stavanger-declaration/
Jenkins, H. (2004). Game design as narrative architecture In N. Wardrip-Fruin & P. Harrigan (Eds.), First
person: New media as story, performance, and game Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press.
Landow, G. P. (2006). Hypertext 3.0: Critical theory and new media in an era of globalization JHU Press.
Murray, J. H. (2016). Hamlet on the holodeck: The future of narrative in cyberspace (2nd ed.) New York,
The Free Press.
Nelson, T. (1970). No more teachers’ dirty looks Computer decisions, 9(8), 16–23.
Papert, S. (1993). The childrens machine: Rethinking school in the age of computer (reprint ed.) New
York: Basic Books.

