:
William H. Dickey, who died of complications from HIV in 1994, was born in 1928 and brought up in the
Pacific Northwest. He published fifteen books of poetry, including Of the Festivities, which was selected
by W. H. Auden for the Yale Series of Younger Poets in 1959, More Under Saturn, which was awarded
the California Silver Medal for Poetry in 1963, and The Rainbow Grocery, which won the Juniper Prize in
1978. In the Dreaming: Selected Poems was published by the University of Arkansas Press in 1994, and
The Education of Desire appeared posthumously from Wesleyan University Press in 1996.

While a professor of English and creative writing at San Francisco State University in the 1980s, he
became interested in the potential of early personal computers to expand the boundaries of poetry. The
California Association of Teachers of English cited him as "Friend of the Machine."

Beginning in 1988, Dickey used the HyperCard software on his Macintosh SE to compose what would
become fourteen "HyperPoems." Integrating images, icons, animation, and sound effects with typography
and text, the HyperPoems address many themes critics acknowledge as central to Dickey's print oeuvre:
history, mythology, memory, sexuality, the barrenness of modern life, and (over and under all of it), love
and death. But they also represent an important technical progression of his poetics, one with clear roots
in the ideas about poetry he had forged through decades of mindfulness about the craft.

Three of the poems (those in Vol. 2) may fairly be called erotica, and represent unique documents of gay
life in San Francisco at the height of a prior pandemic. They are certainly some of the very earliest (and
most explicit) digital creative works by an LGBTQ+ author.

None were ever published in his lifetime. Plans for a posthumous edition (prepared for publication on
floppy disk with technical and editorial assistance from Deena Larsen) ultimately went unfulfilled. In the
summer of 2020, however, the HyperCard Online emulator at the Internet Archive (in Dickey's own home
city of San Francisco) finally offered us a platform. This panel discussion will mark the first public
presentation of Dickey’s innovative HyperCard poetry to the electronic literature community. Panelists will
include:

Matthew Kirschenbaum (Chair), Professor of English and Digital Studies at the University of Maryland.
Kirschenbaum led the effort to recover the poems from older storage media and migrate them to the
Internet Archive.

91

ELO 2021 - abstracts

Deena Larsen, the original technical editor for Dickey’s HyperPoetry. Larsen will walk us through one or
two poems in detail, discussing both poetics and the nature of her posthumous editorial interventions.

Andrew Ferguson, lead for the HyperCard Online emulator. Ferguson will discuss technical challenges
involved in migrating thirty-year-old HyperCard stacks to a browser-based environment.

Susan Tracz, Professor Emerita and the California State University Fresno and Dickey’s literary
executor—and long-time friend of the poet. Tracz will fill in the human story behind the poetry and the
computers.

References
https://archive.org/details/william_dickey_hyperpoems_volume_1
https://archive.org/details/william_dickey_hyperpoems_volume_2

