:
In this panel moderated by Lai-Tze Fan, we examine Twine at ten, exploring the ongoing influence of this
hypertext platform on pedagogy, play, and literature:

What We Talk About When We Talk About Twine (Moulthrop) - Creating digital stories and games involves
many cultural registers. Just as important is the unmapped, semi-formal culture that underlies communal,
open-source software. In the case of Twine, this can involve distinctions among versions of the core
software, associated scripting languages, and "story formats." Learning this buried lore can reveal a
technologized "artworld," in Howard Becker's term, and raises questions of hierarchy, value, and the
nature of creative work in what is essentially a gift economy – questions that may ultimately apply to any
form of art.

Twine at 10: Reflections on Pandemic Storytelling (Salter) - Hypertext and games platform Twine recently
marked its ten year anniversary, complete with a celebratory game jam. Twine’s affordances as a
web-driven, open source tool drive its renewed significance as a platform for rapid response storytelling,
enabling users to build playful, poignant responses to the many challenges of 2020 as exemplified by
Mark Sample’s 10 Lost Boys; Cait Kirby’s September 7, 2020; and Adi Robbertson’s You Have to Ban the
President.

Twine, The EpistoLab (Laiola) - A frustrating element of teaching with Twine is the platform’s limitations
with real-time collaboration across devices. Before COVID, when the classroom could operate as a lab,
this limitation could be solved by students gathering around a single machine. But when shared
machinery and gathering becomes impossible, Twine offers another model--“the epistolab.” The epistolab
follows an epistolary model of collaborative work, dispersing colLABoration across times and spaces, and

79

ELO 2021 - abstracts

prompting a reevaluation of the roles that simultaneity and liveness play in collaboratory, pedagogical
work.

Twine as Literature, Not Literacy, in the Program(ming) Era (Milligan) - In the 21st century digital
humanities, “digital literacy” has seemingly become the humanistic endgame for how we conceptualize,
rationalize, and advertise the skillsets we impart; In e-lit, Twine as well is often presented to students in
these terms. As the potential shortcomings of literacy as sole pedagogical outcome, however, become
increasingly clearer (for instance -- as we reckon with its limitations to prevent
insurgency-through-misinformation in the US), I propose another way to teach Twine and its promise of
digital storytelling differently: through a model, based on the creative writing workshop, that highlights the
literature and literary possibilities of Twine.

The panel will conclude with an open discussion of Twine’s future as a platform.

