:
‘Lost water! Remains Scape?’: Transformation Waterscapes in Coimbatore from past to present through
digital poetry

The digital poetry ‘Lost water! Remains Scape?’ is written in Tamil by the environmental poet Mohamed
Rafiq and in English by Shanmugapriya T, the co-author of this paper. It is created using 2D and 3D
environments, and photos in Blender and Adobe Animate software. The 2D and 3D environments reflect
the narrative about the ecosystem of waterscapes in the past and the photo animations represent the
current situation of the water bodies in Coimbatore, the southern region in South India. This digital poetry
is created based on the findings from our AHRC-funded project ‘Digital Innovations in Water Scarcity,
Coimbatore, South India’. This interdisciplinary project investigates the changed waterscape in
Coimbatore, South India across 150 years by using range of materials and activities including studying
historical maps and satellite imagery, and conducting interviews with local farmers, activists and NGOs.
This digital poetry is an endeavour to bridge gap between digital literature and digital humanities. The
questions we ask in this paper are how can the adoption/integration of digital literary method be an
effective agency and actor to represent the environmental objects and disseminate the findings for
targeted audiences? How can tools and methods contribute to the digital humanities and digital literature
grounded in materials from the global south? The main aim of this paper is to explore the digital literary
method as an effective agency to communicate the research findings to the broader public.

Reminiscence is the primary theme of our digital poetry. It will be mediated through text, animations and
images. Waterscape is an imperative source and forms a conducive ecological community in every
villages of the region Coimbatore. It is a primary source for drinking, irrigation and other economic and
cultural activities. However, the forgotten waterscapes due to drought, dereliction and climate change
have become conduit of drainage waters, and garbage dumbing areas. The photos that have taken during
our field visits depict the current condition of waterbodies among which most of them are in dreadful state.
On the other hand, the oral testimonies of the local farmers illustrate a different situation of waterscapes a
few decades ago. They narrated how they were blessed to have had a healthy waterscape in the past.
They also told us that there were particular flora and fauna that belong to the region had been destroyed
and some of the specific species such as Noyyal Otter had gone extinct. The interactive 2D and 3D
environment of digital poetry will provide a revisitation to such lost waterscapes created based on the oral

113

ELO 2021 - abstracts

testimonies. It will also portray the current condition of waterscapes through photo animation and text
narration. This digital poetry will be disseminated to students, scholars, activists and the general public
through our academic and NGO partners and local schools and colleges. Feedback and some of the
interviews conducted will be made available via the project website.

