‘Pandemic and Protest, Revolution and Reflection: The Online Manifesto in 2020-2021’ 

Julian Hanna, Tilburg University (Netherlands) & ITI/LARSyS (Portugal) 

Preamble 

Welcome to the season of our discontent. I hope this finds you well. 

The manifesto is the ur-genre of the avant-garde, reflecting (and often encouraging) crisis and 
upheaval in politics, society and the arts. The genre’s high period, what Mary Ann Caws calls the 
‘manifesto moment’, happened a century ago, in the decade following the first manifesto of Italian 
Futurism of 1909, and there have been several waves since (Caws, xxii). Most studies of the 
manifesto, however, were written before 2008, and so they (largely) miss the latest wave - the 
digital manifesto - and the unprecedented upheaval that has accompanied this newly invigorated 
form between the years 2008-2021.  

Manifestos thrive in times like these - times of uncertainty, times of crisis, and also (because we 
must be hopeful) times of promise. I wrote about some of these themes in The Manifesto Handbook, 
which came out in February of last year, on the eve of the pandemic. The following month, Breanne 
Fahs’ extensive anthology Burn It Down! Feminist Manifestos for the Revolution was published. As 
Fahs states in her introduction: ‘we have returned again to a period of cultural reckoning .... People 
who once stood on the sidelines are jumping into the fray’ (3). Through mainstream social media 
platforms including Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, and YouTube, as well as niche and alternative 
online spaces, the manifesto has reclaimed its function as a primary marker of history in the 
making. But whether analogue or digital, the manifesto has always served extremely diverse 
movements and ends. Taking the optimistic view, manifestos can act, in the words of the sociologist 
Bruno Latour (in his ‘Compositionist Manifesto’), ‘Not as a war cry … but rather as a warning, a 
call to attention, so as to stop going further in the same way as before toward the future’ (473). 

In this paper I will survey some of the dozens of manifestos that have appeared online in the past 
year and attempt to draw some conclusions and place them in a broader context of online culture. 
As I note in my book, manifestos are always at the bleeding edge of culture and politics (often 
literally). The threats they contain are potent because they are sincere: there is always enough 
instability and wildness about the manifesto to give it real menace - the possibility, near or distant, 
of real danger, real action, actual revolution. What kinds of manifestos will we need going forward 
into the 2020s - a decade that (let’s face it) is not off to an easy start, and that urgently requires our 
active engagement as scholars and citizens? What kinds of manifestos do we deserve, and what kind 
will we get? 

I began collecting manifestos (even more than usual) at the start of the pandemic, keeping a sort of 
hybrid pandemic-protest manifesto diary. As we all know, it was a very out-of-the-ordinary year, a 
year whose only consolation perhaps is the feeling that one is living through and bearing witness to 
history in the making. The account that follows is divided chronologically, moving through the four 
seasons beginning in Spring 2020 and concluding with the current season (as I write this), Spring 
2021. The flourishing of manifestos of all types has shown 2020-2021 to be a period of both action 
and reflection. More precisely it was a year of reflection and reevaluation (spring) followed by 
action and upheaval (summer) followed by frustration and promises of change (autumn) followed 
by reaction and acceleration into near collapse (winter) followed by mounting fatigue, near 

delirium, and finally some hope for the future with the arrival of spring and vaccinations. But 
alongside this wider progression of the seasons there are also subtler cultural shifts which the 
manifesto may help to trace, including changes to forms of expression as new technologies are 
taken up and new digital habits and techniques are born or refined and disseminated across new (as 
well as older) platforms, creating new possibilities. 

Spring 2020 

If there is one manifesto emblematic of the tone of Spring 2020 it must be ‘The Self-Quarantine 
Manifesto’ launched from the website #StayTheFuckHome. The blunt and practical open source 
manifesto, launched in March in 25 languages, describes itself as ‘a set of loose guidelines for 
people who wish to join the movement and take action that can actually make a difference’. Another 
high profile manifesto from March, this time focusing - even at this early stage - on actions for 
bringing about a different post-pandemic world, was published by Bruno Latour on both the 
recently launched French news and analysis site AOC and in several languages on Latour’s own 
website. It takes the form of a questionnaire; a notable variation on the traditional top-down 
approach of even the most revolutionary manifestos. There is still some combative manifesto 
phrasing, however. For example: ‘Now is the time for the annual stock-take. When common sense 
asks us to “start production up again as quickly as possible”, we have to shout back, “Absolutely 
not!”’ But overall this kinder, gentler, more convivial and democratic style of manifesto is a 
continuation of the ‘Compositionist’ manifesto from a decade earlier. Seizing the opportunity for 
change at the outset of the pandemic, Latour asks: ‘What are some suspended activities that you 
would like to see not coming back?’ Similarly, New School design researcher Oscar Salguero’s 
manifesto for a post-Covid world, ‘HIBER 1.0: An Interior Life’, focuses on the metaphor of 
hibernation, the forced break with consumerism and social life and the opportunity for introspection 
and planning for a post-pandemic world. The manifesto, published in March in several languages 
and disseminated both as a printable A1 poster and via an Instagram slideshow (an increasingly 
common form of activism), declares in a performative style: ‘We are consumer dormant, yet 
cognitively dynamic. From this point forward, we can author the narrative.’ 

In the arts, new conditions brought by government responses to the first wave of the pandemic - 
including lockdown confinement, museum and theatre closures, and event cancellations - prompted 
an accompanying wave of manifestos. Some, like e-flux magazine’s ‘Letters Against Separation’, 
launched by Hito Steyerl in April, and 3:AM Magazine’s ‘3:AM in Lockdown’ series, which ran 
from March to June, sought on one level to provide a space for conversations that were no longer 
taking place in person. On another level they opened up larger conversations about art or writing in 
general - how we create and how we live - that are similar in this sense and scale to the aim of 
Latour’s questionnaire: to bring about a reckoning, to have a long overdue conversation about the 
big issues, and to think about what we truly want. At the same time, and again in parallel with 
Latour, there is a sense that this reckoning may require a different type of manifesto from the 
traditional one-note avant-garde provocation. As Guangzhou-based curator Nikita Yingqian Cai 
suggests: ‘The recurring temporality, planetary scale, and racial-political ripples of the pandemic 
have shuffled our epistemological ground, be it in Guangzhou, Beijing, Tashkent, Mexico City, 
Italy, London, Berlin, Seoul, Moscow, somewhere in rural Russia, or on an island. The physical 
separation prompts us to identify with each other’s doubts and ambivalence beyond direct actions 
and manifestos.’ 

Here again was the positive and hopeful silver lining of what Latour calls ‘this unexpected pause’: 
time to reflect and face the concerns that are overlooked in the mad rush of normal everyday life. 
Through May, City Lights Bookstore and Gray Area ran an open invitation manifesto series, with 
contributions made in short, self-shot video format by professional writers and artists (from 
Douglas Rushkoff to Annie Sprinkle) and non-professionals on a wide range of topics: ‘a 
collaborative poetic reflection on current sociopolitical, economic, and ecological challenges’. 
Published as a curated YouTube playlist, the selected manifestos appear as songs, rants, speeches, 
poems, and various other hybrid forms. Meanwhile, the issue of livelihood for artists and culture 
industry workers came to the fore. In Portugal, for example, a movement to protect cultural sector 
workers was launched (primarily via Facebook) in April with demonstrations held across the 
country and a manifesto signed by three hundred prominent artists and writers (‘Vigília Cultura e 
Artes’). 

Despite the focus on the pandemic and its immediate effects, manifestos on other important issues 
also came to light. One example is the European-focused ‘Art for UBI’ manifesto, launched by the 
Institute of Radical Imagination in January 2020 and signed by Franco ‘Bifo’ Berardi and other 
prominent artists and intellectuals, which would become especially timely in the coming months as 
the issue of a form of universal basic income for artists went mainstream during the pandemic as a 
result of closures. Another striking example is ‘Rethinking the Apocalypse: An Indigenous Anti-
Futurist Manifesto’, a radical anti-manifesto launched in March, which proclaims in part: 

We are not concerned with how our enemies name their dead world or how they recognize  
or acknowledge us or these lands. We are not concerned with re-working their ways of 
managing control or honoring their dead agreements or treaties. They will not be compelled 
to end the destruction that their world is predicated upon. We do not plead to with them to 
end global warming, as it is the conclusion of their apocalyptic imperative and their life is 
built upon the death of Mother Earth. 

We bury the right wing and the left wing together in the earth they are so hungry to 
consume. The conclusion of the ideological war of colonial politics is that Indigenous 
Peoples always lose, unless we lose ourselves. 

The manifesto ends with a blank space labelled ‘{emptiness}’, representing the future that was 
denied native peoples by colonisation. 

Summer 2020 

Then suddenly, as we all saw in the news, and many of us witnessed in the streets with our own 
eyes, another type of manifesto and manifestation was dominating international headlines. The 
death of George Floyd on 25 May, captured in a nine-minute-twenty-nine-second video, led to 
protests that were not only nationwide in the US but worldwide, in cities like Berlin and Paris, 
Lisbon and Rio de Janeiro. In June, several blocks of Seattle’s Capitol Hill neighbourhood were 
declared an autonomous zone (‘CHAZ’) by protesters. They issued a manifesto with a list of more 
than thirty demands, related to the justice system, education, the economy, and health and human 
services. The Black Lives Matter movement, meanwhile, had published various manifestos since its 
inception in 2013 following the killing of Trayvon Martin. With a new upsurge in support during 
the summer of 2020, BLM drafted a list of seven demands for its official website, including 
‘Defund the police’ and a call to ‘Convict and ban Trump from future political office’. There was 

also the new feature of a space to co-sign the list of demands, and thus presumably to be added to a 
database of supporters. 

By early June the slogans ‘I can’t breathe’, ‘No justice, no peace’, ‘Defund the police’ and ‘Black 
Lives Matter’ were heard everywhere. Can a slogan be a manifesto? In the 1960s Malcolm X’s ‘By 
any means necessary’ was ubiquitous; Ezra Pound’s ‘Make it new’ encapsulated the modernist 
movement; even Shepard Fairey’s ‘Hope’ poster for Barack Obama’s 2008 campaign managed to 
represent a political platform in a single word. The Portuguese Marxist scholar Boaventura de 
Sousa Santos includes a ‘minifesto’ in his introduction to Epistemologies of the South (2014) (3). 
Nietzsche, the philosopher whose influence on manifesto style has been more profound than any 
except Marx, famously declared: ‘It is my ambition to say in ten sentences what everyone else says 
in a book’ (82). What about one sentence, or one word? Slogans work as manifestos because the 
best manifestos are simultaneously brief, compact, concise; and grand, conceptually all-
encompassing. The slogans of June were manifestos in this sense. 

I remember reading a (humorous) tweet last summer linking the proliferation of high quality protest 
videos to the number of unemployed film school graduates in cities like New York and San 
Francisco. But in fact citizen video has vastly improved in the past couple of years, and more 
importantly it has become more important. People know how to use the technology, from framing 
and lighting to using professional editing tools, microphones, green screens, and they know how to 
act in front of a camera. We are also becoming more critical viewers. As a result, some of the best 
manifestos are no longer written screeds but viral videos, often spontaneously composed and shot in 
the thick of the action. Countless videos of speeches from protesters and community leaders 
appeared online during the summer of 2020. Protest videos are plainly a new form of making 
manifest. As Sara Ahmed writes: ‘In the labor of making manifest we make a manifesto’ (252). 

Of course the foil for these protest video manifestos is the police brutality video, one of which 
ignited the biggest protests in half a century: the video 17-year-old Darnella Frazier took of George 
Floyd’s murder in Minneapolis. There have been numerous examples since, including compilations 
of the most grievous instances of police violence captured during the protests last summer and too 
many police shootings of unarmed Black and Hispanic men, women and children to count. Frazier’s 
video literally made manifest, bore witness, brought facts to light; it contradicted the official police 
statement issued after Floyd’s death and led to the eventual trial and conviction of Derek Chauvin, 
where it was used as a key piece of evidence.  

Manifestos are typically of a marginal and ephemeral nature - once pamphlets and posters, they are 
now more often tweets or Instagram posts or TikToks, fleeting Reddit posts or YouTube videos lost 
in the continuous ebb and flow, shouting mostly unheard on a distant corner of the internet. 
Occasionally, however, a manifesto will go viral as Frazier’s did last summer, and incite action in 
real numbers, on real streets, calling for and bringing real change. Against the status quo and 
‘weapons of delay’ (in Martin Luther King’s phrase), they seek to upend the present, give a voice to 
the unheard, and push for the arrival of a better future. 

Autumn 2020 

Autumn was a restless season. The long running and alarmingly consequential reality TV program 
that was the US presidential election reached its finale in November, with a protracted outcome that 
nevertheless brought relief to many around the world. More than ever during this time, ‘manifesto-

ese’ became the norm; with everyone trading barbs and slogans on various social media platforms, 
including newly popular platforms such as Parler, Gab, and Rumble, that would become even more 
popular during the winter as prominent figures on the American Right were banned from 
mainstream platforms (Ray). (In October the conspiracy group QAnon, which had been growing 
exponentially during the pandemic year, was banned from YouTube.) Seizing on a line from Trump 
during the presidential debates, the far-right street-fighting group the Proud Boys began to circulate 
memes and make polo shirts bearing the manifesto-like slogan ‘stand back and stand by’ (Timberg 
& Dwoskin). As I write in The Manifesto Handbook:  

the shifts happening to language on the internet more broadly also impact manifesto writing, 
possibly to a disproportionate degree given the natural affinities between manifestos and 
social media. Twitter is an obvious example: if you use the platform regularly, as a lot of 
writers do, in effect you’re already fluent in manifesto-ese. You are conditioned to make 
your point as clearly and directly as possible, to find and push forward a strong “take” on 
any issue, and to win converts with emotional, gut-level appeals. We are more competitive 
than ever, projecting arrogance as we shout to be heard in the crowded marketplace of ideas. 
In the process we expand the Overton window, the sense of what is acceptable in polite 
discourse. It might be wise to ask: is this desirable? (131) 

Among academics and students and digital workers of all kinds, meanwhile, a very tangible Zoom 
fatigue began to set in. This extreme weariness of screen-based communication, manifesting as 
outrage and exhaustion, is perfectly captured in artist and educator Michelle Kasprzak’s ‘Anti-
Video Chat Manifesto’ (2020), published on her blog, which declares: ‘WE REFUSE to fake human 
presence.’ After a collective shoutout to the new surveillance (‘Hello NSA Hello FiveEyes Hello 
China Hello hacker who lives downstairs Hello University IT Department Hello random person 
joining the call’), Kasprzak makes a passionate plea for non-visual communication: 

 
 
 
 

Here is my voice: Listen.  
It is full of unquantifiable information. It is human, soft, real. …  
So no, no video today. Or tomorrow.  
You’ll remember what I look like, when we meet again. 

Winter 2020-2021 

Winter brought a new wave of the pandemic across Europe, the US and elsewhere, and there was a 
general sense of upheaval and near collapse, both in terms of pandemic and protest. The latter could 
be seen in the January 6, 2021 invasion by Trump supporters of the US Capitol building - a stark 
reminder, if one were needed, that manifestos are not by any means necessarily progressive, and 
neither is the counterculture. The so-called ‘QAnon Shaman’, Jake Angeli, made headlines when he 
manifested inside the Capitol, like a meme suddenly come to life, wearing a ‘shamanic’ headdress 
with horns, an assortment of furs, red, white and blue warpaint, and carrying a spear. He was 
photographed standing in front of the Vice President’s chair on the Senate floor. Earlier the same 
day the President himself offered a case - often seen in manifesto writing - of violent speech 
overstepping the bounds into incitement of real-world violence, while at the same time on various 
platforms inflammatory chatter from his supporters was spilling over into real-life action as well. 

Conclusion: Spring 2021 

Almost halfway through 2021 it is hard to argue that everything is fine; in fact the now ancient 
‘This is fine’ meme (the cartoon dog trying to reassure himself that the situation is not hopeless 
while everything around him goes up in flames) still seems like an apt reflection of our present 
moment. So, how can manifestos help? Where is interesting work happening in the field of 
manifesto writing in the early 2020s? And what more can be done? 

What I hope to see going forward is more collaboration, more experimentation, and fewer 
boilerplate manifestos in the manner of Marx and Marinetti. A good example of what is possible in 
terms of formal innovation comes from Rosa Menkman, author of the ‘Glitch Studies 
Manifesto’ (2010). Menkman’s latest manifesto (2015/2020), ‘institutions of Resolution Disputes 
(i.R.D.)’, is critical of institutional failures. It takes the form of five apparently inscrutable acrylic 
panels that require de-encrypting to be read. Each panel depicts a different tenet, for example: 
‘Through iRD’s tactics beyond resolution, the otherwise grey mundane objects of everyday life 
show their colours. iRD are not a Wunderkabinet of dead media, but a foggy bootleg trail for 
vernacular resistance.’ The book containing this manifesto ends with a quote from Donna 
Haraway’s A Cyborg Manifesto (1985), still a key influence for the current generation of 
cyberfeminists. 

‘A Manifesto for Touch in Crisis’, a collaborative manifesto currently being written for the ongoing 
In-Touch project at University College London, is an interesting example both in terms of its origins 
and its subject matter (Steimle & Pourjafarian). Scholarly manifestos have become increasingly 
common in recent years across the disciplines, even taking the form of academic papers (e.g. Hanna 
et al). Regarding subject matter, this project and its manifesto suddenly finds itself the forefront of 
research into human relations during the pandemic. Looking ahead into 2021, the Ars Electronica 
festival promises ‘A New Digital Deal’, jumping ahead metaphorically from the anticipated post-
pandemic ‘roaring twenties’ to the Roosevelt-inspired New Deal thirties. In my own work I recently 
co-wrote a manifesto titled ‘The Possibility of Atopia’ - or rather an ‘unmanifesto’, in keeping with 
the atopian theme: ‘not invented from utopian fantasies but made from existing scraps of 
materials’ (Auger & Hanna). Is this the future of manifestos - beyond utopia and dystopia? 

Finally, a note on the subject of crisis and rebuilding: the French poet Guillaume Apollinaire’s last 
manifesto, ‘The New Spirit and the Poets’ (1917-18), was published shortly before his death in 
Paris during the last great pandemic a century ago, two days before the end of the First World War. 
His manifesto’s influential ‘call to order’ declares a return to Classicism and a turning away from 
Romanticism after the carnage and chaos of the war. It is an example of the manifesto’s tendency to 
draw a line against the past. No more looking backward, no more dwelling in the past, no more 
tragedy and defeat, only youth and optimism, hope in the present and future, in art and society alike 
(‘The new spirit which will dominate the poetry of the entire world’; 227). Not only to tear down 
but also to constructively envision the world that comes afterwards - that is the hard part. Some use 
manifestos to imagine and bring about better futures, others (especially on the Right) to evoke 
nostalgia for an imaginary past. Scanning the horizon, critiquing the present and pushing forward 
new futures are the manifesto’s principal tasks. Many of the dreams first articulated in manifestos 
keep recurring down through the decades, even centuries. Thinking about and shaping the future, 
and forming communities, are some of the manifesto’s greatest strengths. In the best cases the three 
elements come together:  

future vision + practical social/artistic application + community = manifesto 

Works Cited 

‘3:AM in Lockdown’. 3:AM Magazine. https://www.3ammagazine.com/3am/?
s=3%3Aam+in+lockdown. Accessed 30 April 2021. 

Ahmed, Sara. Living a Feminist Life. Duke University Press, 2017. 

Apollinaire, Guillaume. ‘The New Spirit and the Poets’. Selected Writings of Guillaume 
Apollinaire, trans. Roger Shattuck. New Directions, 1971, pp. 227-37. 

‘Art for UBI (Manifesto)’. Institute of Radical Imagination. 16 January 2021. https://
instituteofradicalimagination.org/2021/01/16/art-for-ubi-manifesto-launching-campaign/. Accessed 
24 April 2021. 

Auger, James, and Julian Hanna. ‘The Possibility of Atopia: An Unmanifesto’. Perspecta 54: 
Atopia. MIT Press (forthcoming 2021). 

‘BLM Demands’. Black Lives Matter. https://blacklivesmatter.com/blm-demands/. Accessed 3 May 
2021. 

Cai, Nikita Yingqian. ‘Letters against Separation - Nikita Yingqian Cai in Guangzhou’. e-flux. 
https://conversations.e-flux.com/t/letters-against-separation-nikita-yingqian-cai-in-guangzhou/9945. 
Accessed 22 April 2021. 

‘Capitol Hill Autonomous Zone - Demands’. https://capitolhillautonomous.zone/demands.html. 
Accessed (via Wayback Machine) 6 May 2021. 

Caws, Mary Ann. Manifesto: A Century of Isms. University of Nebraska Press, 2001. 

Fahs, Breanne. Burn It Down: Feminist Manifestos for the Revolution. Verso, 2020. 

Hanna, Julian. The Manifesto Handbook: 95 Theses on an Incendiary Form. Zero Books, 2020. 

Hanna, Julian, et al. ‘Dissent by Design: A Manifesto for CHI Manifestos’. Extended Abstracts of 
the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, May 2019, pp. 1-10. https://
doi.org/10.1145/3290607.3310423. Accessed 1 May 2021. 

Kasprzak, Michelle. ‘Anti-Video Chat Manifesto’. https://michelle.kasprzak.ca/blog/writing-
lecturing/anti-video-chat-manifesto. Accessed 3 May 2021. 

Latour, Bruno. ‘What protective measures can you think of so we don’t go back to the pre-crisis 
production model?’ Bruno Latour, 29 March 2020. http://www.bruno-latour.fr/sites/default/files/
downloads/P-202-AOC-ENGLISH_1.pdf. Accessed 1 May 2021. 

‘Manifesto - City Lights x Gray Area’. YouTube. https://youtube.com/playlist?
list=PLm8zJ0HKEJIZ59JTGlV6JwGxDpkILrViq. Accessed 1 May 2021. 

Menkman, Rosa. ‘institutions of Resolution Disputes (i.R.D.)’. Beyond Resolution, 2020. https://
beyondresolution.nyc3.digitaloceanspaces.com/
Rosa%20Menkman_Beyond%20Resolution_2020.pdf. Accessed 30 April 2021. 

Nietzsche, Friedrich. Twilight of the Idols with the Antichrist and Ecce Homo. Wordsworth Editions, 
2007. 

Ray, Siladitya. ‘The Far-Right Is Flocking To These Alternate Social Media Apps - Not All Of 
Them Are Thrilled’. Forbes, 14 January 2021. https://www.forbes.com/sites/siladityaray/
2021/01/14/the-far-right-is-flocking-to-these-alternate-social-media-apps---not-all-of-them-are-
thrilled/?sh=31657efd55a4. Accessed 30 April 2021. 

‘Rethinking the Apocalypse: An Indigenous Anti-Futurist Manifesto’. Indigenous Action. https://
indigenousaction.org/wp-content/uploads/rethinking-the-apocalypse-PRINT.pdf. Accessed 11 April 
2021. 

Salguero, Oscar. ‘HIBER 1.0: An Interior Life’. Nobody is an Island. https://nobodyisanisland.cc/
OSCAR-SALGUERO-HIBER-1-0-An-Interior-Life. Accessed 2 May 2021. 

Santos, Bonaventura de Sousa. Epistemologies of the South. Routledge, 2016. 

‘The Self-Quarantine Manifesto’. https://staythefuckhome.com. Accessed 30 April 2021. 

 Steimle, Jürgen, and Narjes Pourjafarian, ‘A Manifesto for Touch in Crisis’. In-Touch: Digital 
Touch Communication. https://in-touch-digital.com/a-manifesto-for-touch-in-crisis/. Accessed 1 
May 2021. 

Timberg, Craig, and Elizabeth Dwoskin. ‘Trump’s debate comments give an online boost to a group 
social media companies have long struggled against.’ Washington Post, 30 September 2021. https://
www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2020/09/30/trump-debate-rightwing-celebration/. Accessed 1 
May 2021. 

‘Vigília Cultura e Artes’. Facebook. https://m.facebook.com/vigiliaculturaeartes/. Accessed 22 April 
2021.

