 

Generated Texts: Reading Strategy and Interpretational Options 

 
The  paper  is  devoted  to  the  reading  and  critical  reflection  of  the  generated  electronic 
literary texts. From the structural point of view all textones of generated texts can be divided into 
standard  schemes  or  patterns  (word  combinations  or  the  whole  sentences  that  are  switched 
according to the software algorithms). Authors use these schemes to make generated texts close to 
the natural human language. If we look closer, for example, at generative elit works, most of their 
verbal patterns look like meaningful expressions. But what makes them meaningful and what kind 
of meaning can readers get from these patterns? Is it possible to catch the esthetic idea of the whole 
generated  work  analyzing  these  verbal  patterns?  One  of  the  strategies  to  reveal  the  author’s 
aesthetic concept of the generated work is to identify the key words grid of the separate textone as 
well as of the whole work. The key words grid allows to catch the thematic dominant and then 
move to the interpretive strategies of the whole literary work. 

 
Key words: generative, verbal, key words, thematic grid, interpretive strategies 
 
Generative electronic literary texts are works of electronic literature in which textons are 
generated by a software application based on text databases and syntactic models. Generative texts 
are  one  of  the  very  first  forms  of  electronic  creativity.  The  mechanism  of  text  generation  in 
generative electronic poetic works is based on the following categories: 

* strophic organization (for rhythmized and rhymed electronic texts);  
* meter and verse size; 
* text generation algorithms (algorithmic syntax, phrase matrix, etc.).  
As for the generative method, it was used around 700 BC, namely in the "Book of Changes" 
– one of the earliest Chinese philosophical texts. The concept of generative texts was applied in 
the 1920s. It  was  a kind  of  "slicing method"  created by the founder of Dadaism T. Tzara.  Pre-
electronic attempts in the field of generative literature can also be attributed to the work of the 
French  group  ULIPO  -  "Workshop  of  potential  literature"  (OuLiPo,  Ouvroir  de  littérature 
potentielle). In the modern world of digital technologies there are undoubtedly more opportunities 
for  implementing  generative  algorithms.  Invention  of  software  code  has  made  it  possible  to 
develop systems that generate text variants according to specific parameters, and the Internet has 
created a limitless environment for experiments and opportunities to share them. 

The first copies of electronic generative texts show that very often at this stage generative 
works were created by author groups that included technical specialists, designers, and poets or 
writers. One example of such collaboration is the "House of Dust" (Knowles, Tenney), published 
in 1969 as a result of the collaboration of the American writer and poet –  Alison Knowles and 
programmer James Tenney, who in 1967 took part in the workshop of the Fluxus group (Fluxus). 
Thus,  J.  Tenney  presented  an  electronic  generator  based  on  the  FORTRAN-IV  programming 
language. He demonstrated how the algorithm of interchangeability and recombination of verbal 
elements  can  become  an  independent  work  of  art.  The  "House  of  Dust"  algorithm  is  a  fixed 
structure  in  which  a  single  recombination  scheme  of  verbal  elements  is  implemented,  and  no 
variations or data input is allowed. The work is not interactive. A. Knowles, in turn, developed a 
scheme of elements recombination, which is a poetic stanza with the following structure: 

house (list of materials) 
in (list location) 
use (list of light sources) 
inhabited (list of residents)  
The  elements  are  selected  from  the  database  and  inserted  into  the  specific  line  of  the 
quatrain. The resulting variants are non-rhymed, but rhythmized stanzas that have a meaning, for 
example: 

A HOUSE MADE OF TIN 

IN THE DESERT 
USING NATURAL LIGHT 
INHABITED BY VARIOUS BIRDS AND SPECIES 
or 
HOUSE OF BROKEN DISHES 
IN THE SOUTH OF FRANCE 
USING CANDLESTICKS 
INHABITED BY PEOPLE WHO LIKE TO EAT TOGETHER 
or 
THATCHED HOUSE 
IN A VERY CROWDED AREA 
USE OF ELECTRICITY 
INHABITED BY PEOPLE WHO SLEEP MOST OF THE TIME 
or 
THE HOUSE OF DISCARDED CLOTHES 
AMONG THE HIGH MOUNTAINS 
USING NATURAL LIGHT 
INHABITED BY FISHERMEN AND FAMILIES (Knowles, Tenney). 
This type of electronic generative text can be called gap-based texts, since each line of the 
quatrain  contains  a  gap,  which  in  each  new  generated  texton  requires  the  substitution  of  the 
necessary element from the database. Each quatrain of "House of Dust" uses attribute constructions 
with the semantics of non-sensory features related to the sphere of knowledge or experience (A 
HOUSE OF BROKEN DISHES / IN SOUTHERN FRANCE / USING CANDLES / INHABITED 
BY PEOPLE WHO ENJOY EATING TOGETHER; A HOUSE OF TIN / IN A DESERT / USING 
NATURAL LIGHT / INHABITED BY VARIOUS BIRDS AND SPECIES, etc.).  

Most of the adjectives denote the state of things and events in the real life, which indicates 
their denotative, rather than qualificative structure. The present participle of the verb ‘use’ and the 
past participle of the verb ‘inhabit’ are used in the third and fourth lines of the "House of Dust". 
Both sentences convey the semantics of knowledge gained as a result of observation or experience. 
The paralinguistic component of the "House of Dust" is the capitalization technique, which does 
not have a meaning-forming potential, but is used by the author to isolate and segment individual 
stanzas and quatrains formed from them. 

One of the most common types of electronic art generative texts are combinatorial works 
based  on  the  technique  of  rearranging  verbal  fragments  (words,  phrases).  For  example,  the 
"Storyland"  by  N.  Wylde.  This  is  one  of  the  few  electronic  generative  texts  that  has  an  audio 
component  integrated  into  its  structure.  The  audio  plays  an  important  semantic  function  in  the 
work,  sets  its  leitmotif.  The  sound  component  is  represented  by  the  melody  which  is  called 
"Entrance of the Gladiators" composed in 1897 by the Czech composer Julius Fučík. This melody 
became  widely  known  all  over  the  world.  It  was  repeatedly  used  in  circus  performances 
(accompanying performances of clowns). The audio evokes additional cultural connotations in the 
semantic  structure  of  the  work.  Associations  with  the  circus  environment  are  projected  on  the 
"Storyland"  semantic  structure,  supporting  a  certain  range  of  interpretive  lines,  which  are 
determined  by  the  words  belonging  to  the thematic  group  ‘circus’.  This  thematic  group  can  be 
divided into two parts that form the directions of "Storyland" interpretation. On the one hand, the 
emphasis  is  on the  specifics  of  text  production  based  on  machine  intelligence  (the  associations 
with  such  components  as  ‘trick’  and  ‘stunt’).  On  the  other  hand,  the  words  ‘performance’, 
‘laughter’, ‘entertainment’ form the emotional attitude of the work perception. 

All sentences in each texton of "Storyland" are generated according to a certain scheme. 
For  example,  for  the  first  of  the  six  paragraphs,  this  scheme  looks  like  the  following:  [Tense] 
[Character  A]  [past-tense  predicative]  [preposition]  [object]  /  [adverbial  structure].  Since  all 
textons look the same in terms of grammatical and syntactic structure, let us consider one of them 
as an example: 

"Long ago and far away, a down-and-out writer developed emphatic skills. The writer was 

openly hostile. 

Fashion shifted. 
The writer made callous remarks to a co-dependent lover. The co-dependent lover also was 

openly hostile but didn’t care. 

Unaware of their influence, the most valuable player created an image. The most valuable 

player was greedy. 

Assumptions were made. 
The most valuable player spoke disparagingly of the writer. The write wanted a relationship 

with the co-dependent lover» (Wylde). 

As  you  can  see,  the  text  demonstrates  the  informative  register  that  is  indicated  by  the 
temporal and spatial localization of events at the beginning of the work (“Long ago and far away”) 
and predicates with the meaning of an unobservable state and action (“developed emphatic skills”, 
“was  openly  hostile”,  “Fashion  shifted,  was  greedy”,  “Assumptions  were  made”,  “spoke 
disparagingly”,  “wanted  a  relationship  with  the  co-dependent  lover”).  All  sentences  are 
characterized  by  a  low  level  of  detail,  just  the  general  impression  of  what  is  happening  and 
assumptions about the events development. 

All textons in "Storyland" have the same grammatical and syntactic structure with small 
changes of predicates and objects. Despite the fact that the textons present several disparate events 
in which three actors are involved somehow, they can be interpreted as a coherent text in the genre 
of  a  modern  parable.  To  combine  the  events  described  in  a  separate  text  fragment  requires  the 
interpretive efforts of the reader, who needs to fill in the gaps, to imagine the missing event series 
and to deduce the appropriate moral of the story (Rettberg). The author of "Storyland" offers the 
reader a sketch of the plot with a lot of space for interpretation. The reader is supposed to seek and 
restore the semantic thread of the work. Minimalistic generative texts in this sense are a kind of 
provocation for the recipient, initiating the emergence of the fictional world in his/her mind with 
independently constructed internal connections. 

Some electronic literary generative texts are based on classical literary texts, fragments of 
which are modified using various recombination options. For example, the "Sea and Spar between" 
by N. Montfort, S. Strickland which is based on the corpus of texts by E. Dickinson and "Moby 
Dick, or the White Whale" by H. Melville. Here are some examples of the generated the “Sea and 
Spar between" stanzas: 

" oh, time  
Immaculate go and go- 
oh, time 
nailed to the board”; 
"oh, time, 
no suits, turn around and warm up, 
oh, time  
nailed to the sash”;  
 
“How to maintain the course of the pink jay 
, nailed to the room 
by a whirlwind for 
eternity! cancel!”;  
 
“How to maintain the course of the pink jay 
, nailed to the mast 
of the dive into 
eternity! a dowry!”;   
 
“turn 

on the stride without the suit and go, 
turn 
on the nailed to the deck”;  
 
“The wheel is on 
Step and dance without costumes 
The wheel is on 
Nailed to the coffin”;  
 
“You too  
Without the suit, turn around and leave 
You, too.  
Nailed to the groove”;  
 
“You, too  
Silent turn and climb 
You, too.  
Nailed to the mast” (Montfort, Strickland). 
 
From the structural point of view all texts are easily parsed into typical schemes used by 
the software algorithm to form unique textons. So, the textons that are given above, it can be seen 
that the first two stanzas correspond to the scheme:  

[noun]  
[noun + less - verb Past Simple - verb past simple / noun +  less – verb/ present tense - 

verb/ present tense]  

[noun]  
 [nailed] to the [noun]. 

 

 

The next two stanzas have a scheme: 

[How to withstand the jay pink course]  
[nailed to the – noun / object] 
[verb + preposition / on] 
[noun! noun!] 
 
In the following two stanzas, the scheme is the following: 
 
[verb – preposition / on] 
[noun + less – verb – verb] 
[verb – preposition / on] 
 [nailed] to the [noun]. 
 
Each  stanza  consists  of  four  non-rhymed  lines  with  no  punctuation  marks,  except  for 
dashes, which facilitates the process of combining verbal elements. The use of refrains (repetition 
of individual words / whole lines) leads to the formation of a thematic grid of the work, which 
contributes to the decoding the semantic content of both a single texton and the whole set of textons 
in the work. The lexemes that form the thematic grid in the "Sea and the Spar between" include 
groups of nouns with the meaning of a large space / unlimited number, etc.: (time-sky-eternity). 
The second group of lexemes includes both nouns and verbs with the semantics of space restriction 
(coffin-nailed). The third group is formed by predicates with the meaning of an incentive to an 
action aimed at getting out of a closed space / situation of restricted movement (the wheel is on-
the dive is  on  – the loop  is  on).   Stanzas are  verbal  blocks containing  calls to  perform certain 

actions. The first two lines of the textones in the "Sea and Spar between" usually contain calls for 
action directed outside (for example, “Costumeless turn and climb”; “Costumeless turn and leave”; 
“Costumless step and dance”; “Flawless walk and leave” and etc.). The lastt lines, on the contrary, 
implement  the  semantics  of  attachment,  lack  of  freedom,  no  movement,  inability  to  leave  a 
particular place (“nailed to a mast”; “nailed to a coffin”; “nailed to a groove”; “nailed to a to the 
table”). 

The textones generated in the "Sea and Spar between" can be easily interpreted into a set 
of meanings with the help of the recipient's interpretive efforts. The involvement of the reader in 
the  semantic  formation  of  the  generated  texts  is  one  of  the  immutable  conditions  of  electronic 
generative art. One of the probable interpretations of the "Sea and Spar between" is to implement 
the idea of contrast, which is generally common to the world order. In the technocratic era it is 
becoming more and more obvious that the vast space (it is compared in the work with the infinity 
of the sea, sky, eternity, the virtual space of the World Wide Web) is contrasted with the isolation 
of  a  particular  person,  the  limitations  of  natural  communication  in  the  modern  world.    The 
interpretive  tactic  in  this  case  is  like  haiku  interpretation.  When  the  first  line  uses  a  keyword  / 
image or action (in haiku, a seasonal word). In the second and third lines, this image is distributed 
within a single sentence. The last line is a  metaphor.  The keywords in  this  case are ‘primitive 
texts’,  like  minimal  models  of  the  text  content  which  they  are  the  key.    The  interpretation  of 
keywords suggests their consideration as indicators of the work content and even its style. 

 

The 

house 

of 

dust. 

DAMN  Magazine. 

Knowles A. 
https://www.damnmagazine.net/2016/09/07/the-house-of-dust-by-alison-knowles/ 
30.04.2021). 
Monfort N. 
https://nickm.com/montfort_strickland/sea_and_spar_between/ (accessed: 30.09.2020). 
Rettberg, Scott (2019). Electronic Literature. Cambridge: Polity Press 
Wylde N. Storyland. Electronic literature collection. Cambridge: Electronic literature organization, 
2006.  –  URL:  https://collection.eliterature.org/1/works/wylde__storyland.html 
(accessed: 
30.04.2021). 

URL: 
(accessed: 

Spar 

Between. 

1969. 

Sea 

and 

URL: 

 

