María Mencía 
 
Digital Methodologies for Analysing and Disseminating Community Research. 
(A reflection on practice by the artist/researcher) 
 
Keywords: methodology, co-creation, collaboration, multimodality, community research, community building, 
digital platforms/tools, creative practices, storytelling, healing, societal issues, COVID 19.  
 
The global COVID-19 pandemic has made me further address the value that artistic practice 
can have on our mental and psychological health and its significance in community healing. 
According to Gloster AT. et al. the main impact of the virus was uncertainty and of the 
lockdowns were stress, depression, affect and wellbeing (2020, p. 3). COVID 19 has affected 
our mental health, raising feelings of uncertainty, isolation, hopelessness, fear, and anxiety; 
it has challenged us to change our lifestyles and rebalance our commitments to work, 
family, education, and recreation. This global disaster has also hit people from 
disadvantaged backgrounds much harder, particularly those in challenging financial 
situations; suffering from pre-existing health conditions or living with violent and abusive 
partners. It has shown us just how imbalanced our societies are, in terms of race and gender 
for example. Online platforms have taken a major role serving to make this situation more 
bearable. We are learning to do what we did before, at a distance and in some cases even in 
isolation. 
 
As an artist and researcher in creative practices, I have, for a while now, used such online 
platforms to create spaces to share personal stories. I have been able to connect narratives 
to bring up issues of power, territory, displacement, personal and historical memory, 
gender, and violence. The COVID pandemic has forced us to live, work, socialise at a 
distance using such digital platforms and it has highlighted the importance of finding ways 
to engage global communities to share their healing stories, even if it is done in isolation 
and at a distance, through electronic literature and art.  
 
Consequently, in this paper I would like to explore the use of methodologies and digital 
tools which can help to conduct and disseminate interdisciplinary research projects 
alongside artists and communities. I have experience of working in community groups in 
galleries, museums and schools, and my research and practice draws from these. However, 
the two projects discussed in this paper, Invisible Voices and Share to Heal workshop, are 
more focused on societal issues which occurred due to specific social or political 
circumstances of a period in time. They address questions in connection to community 
histories; the value that creative storytelling and artistic approaches can have in sharing 
personal stories; and the value of working directly with participants. The paper also 
highlights the impact these projects can have not only to these specific communities, but 
also to society in general. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

1 

Project One - Invisible Voices: Women Victims of the Colombian Conflict 
 
The first case study in this context is titled Invisible Voices: Women Victims of the Colombian 
Conflict, funded by the Arts and Humanities Research council (AHRC) of England 1 and 
addresses the issue of the representation of the conflict and victims in Colombia’s 60-year-
long conflict.  
 
We have been aware of the use of the Internet as a medium and as a platform for 
communication and dissemination for a long time now. In the early 1990’s many artists took 
advantages of this medium to produce work outside the confinements of the gallery and 
even geographical and national barriers with works of “netart”2.  
 
Mark Tribe and Reena Jana, in their condensed and comprehensive book New Media Art, 
look at art practices in the age of digital communication and distribution. They present 
examples representatives of how artists have always engaged with emerging media 
technologies (the Internet one of them) as it made a global movement of Art, to explore 
cultural, social and aesthetics possibilities. This global characteristic is now a leading aspect 
in the way we experience the everyday in connection to the use of online platforms for 
more creative practices.  
 
Tribe and Jana (2006, p. 6) highlight how the Internet has meant different things for 
different people, whether a way to get rich, a place for political grassroots, a place for 
publishing, for distributing information and for advertising. As they mention, as early as 
1994, new terms started to appear such as web, the net, cyberspace and <dot com.> which 
now are so familiar. It was around this time that the first commercial web browsers enabled 
everyone to become a digital artist and made the World Wide Web a source of inspiration 
and dissemination.  
 
Up till now artists have used the Internet as a medium and a way to create and distribute 
digital art-literature. However, separation between the medium and the artist still existed, 
the physical and the virtual spaces were still apparent and although virtual reality has 
brought them closer, it is arguably only through the current global pandemic, that media-
technologies have become engrained in our lives, accentuating our dependence on online 
communication.  The way we experience our everyday life, communicate, interact, and 
understand the social, the cultural, the self, through the digital medium, has changed.  
 
In this age of pandemic, separation and isolation geographical boundaries have become 
closer through online platforms. Poignant issues of neglect from many governments in 
tackling COVID 19 make it even more imperative to think of new ways to build applications 
where users can share personal stories, concerns, mental health problems, challenges or 
social issues through narrative methods and media art practices. We need to connect the 

 

1 It was undertaken in conjunction with an interdisciplinary team of experts working in different fields of 
research: Modern Languages, Media Arts, Computer Sciences and Human Rights Law. See website: 
https://www.voces-invisibles.com/  (Accessed 12/05/2021) 
2 net.art also known as Internet art due to the use of the Internet as its medium and place from which to draw 
material to create artwork. 

 

2 

community of electronic literature-art with such communities in our new local-globalised 
spaces with the primary aim of healing. 
  
Community Research  
 
This interest in building communities and sharing stories had already started to emerge 
from my art and came into realisation through my artistic practice-based research project 
The Winnipeg: The Poem that Crossed the Atlantic, where (through digital humanities 
research and the use of digital methodologies) international communities came together to 
heal. Issues of cultural identity, heritage, memory, homeland, migration, exile, refugees, 
disaggregation, and displacement were addressed. And, more recently through the project 
Invisible Voices created alongside a community of women who have suffered violence and 
trauma.  
 
Invisible Voices: Women Victims of the Colombian Conflict is a practice-based research 
project part of the bigger research investigation Memory, Victims, and Representation of the 
Colombian Conflict3. Above all, it focuses on exploring and incentivising new means of 
awareness with regards to the self-representation of women victims of the Colombian 
conflict through different creative practices. 
 
We invited members of the Ruta Pacífica de las Mujeres4 with women from across 
Colombia, and from the corporation of Zoscua in Boyacá5; to take part in a week of co-
creation workshops in Bogota, to discuss through storytelling and creative practices, their 
experience as victims of the Colombian armed conflict. As co-investigator, my role was 
leading the workshops with the aim to collect materials to create a documentary website 
and create an online digital artwork.  
 
The aim of the workshops was to give voice to the women victims who were participating 
and construct a collective memory, a memory where they felt represented. It involved 
collecting materials for the website, an interactive digital artwork and producing 
suggestions for alternative forms of representation of victimhood which are victim-centric, 
primarily through storytelling and the digital art. 
 
The digital art explored the potential of digital technologies through multimodality, non-
linear representations, non-classic narratives and in a way the women could understand and 
interact with their different literacies. I posed a series of research enquires starting with 

 

3 For more information see https://www.liverpool.ac.uk/humanities-and-social-sciences/research/research-
themes/transforming-conflict/representation-of-colombian-conflict/ 
4 La Ruta Pacifica is a feminist movement with national political action, which works for the negotiated 
processing of the armed conflict in Colombia and to make visible the impact of the war on the lives and bodies 
of women; it is pacifist, antimilitarist and builder of an ethic of nonviolence in which justice, peace, equity, 
autonomy, freedom and the recognition of otherness are fundamental principles.  Source: 
https://rutapacifica.org.co/wp/quienes-somos/ (Accessed 9/05/2021) 
5 The Corporation of Zoscua is based in the city of Tunja, in Boyacá, Colombia. It contributes to the 
construction of democracy based on social justice and works for the strengthening and consolidation of 
democratic forms of civic and social participation, with the goal to improve the living conditions of their 
communities. See http://zoscua.blogspot.com/ (Accessed 9/05/2021) 
 

 

3 

how digital technologies could help to make visible the voices of the women victims; I 
explored the opportunities co-creative practices could provide as methodology for 
collaboration between artist and community with the aim of making the participants agents 
of change, as well as a co-creation as a method for healing through sharing. I explored how 
hybrid artistic practices including physical/analogue and digital could facilitate new forms of 
audio-visual representations. 
 
Our documentary website resulted in a detailed research project which allowed its 
participants to voice their experience through a clear set of goals and research questions; to 
showreel the creative process of the workshops, methods, participation, and media used; 
and to thereby create a work of digital art which also allowed for the addition of comments 
in the mobile application.   
 
Physical: Face to Face Workshops 
 
To find more tailored methods designed in response to this specific context, I liaised with 
the Colombian local impact coordinator who had already worked with some of the women 
and were happy to contribute to this mixed-media and multimodal production. She 
interviewed them before I designed the workshops and this helped me to understand how I 
could interact with them - largely through asking the right questions in a manner they would 
find them relevant to their experiences. It was important that these documents were 
written for the lay person to understand the work’s aim and scope, as well as their 
significance as agents of change. The participants needed to be aware that the sessions 
would be recorded, and that these recordings will constitute a significant part of the final 
artwork (they were all, of course, anonymised).  
 
Integral to the nature of this work was to provide a transparent approach to create a safe 
environment and to build trust. Thus, the next step was to involve the research group in 
discussions to provide women with a programme of activities for them to choose from. This 
was important due to the mixed- abilities and literacies among the group.  
 
This method of co-creation was a significant part of the process because it allowed the 
women to become more investing in the study; instead of being passive providers of 
information to be used by an artist, they took an active role in deciding how they wanted 
their stories to be told. Within this space of cocreation, we worked with life-stories and 
story-based communication, as Hardy, Sumner and Lambert have significantly used in their 
storytelling practice; as well as explored creative approaches and processes, individual and 
in group using multimodal communication through visual, audio, writing and performance 
practices. The participants were encouraged to bring materials and through user generated 
processes we gathered photographic material; also, the artworks women created in the 
workshops in the form of audio, visual and written materials became part of both the 
artwork and the website. 
 
Why storytelling? 
 
In this paper I have highlighted the value of personal stories for learning and awareness. Joe 
Lambert has been working extensively with the practice of digital storytelling, he founded 

 

4 

the Centre for Digital Storytelling (now StoryCentre) in 1994 and he is the author of Seven 
Stages: Story and the Human Experience. The StoryCentre’s document on ‘Storytelling 
Program Impacts’ describes how over the last 20 years, health, education, academia and 
community have welcomed storytelling and participatory media production methods to 
share life experience narratives through the production of filmmaking narratives.  
 
They are interested in the first-person voice, the process, participation, and the multimedia 
production. StoryCentre has a range of methods which they identify under the umbrella of 
StoryWork. They write ‘We work closely with workshop participants to ensure that the 
social and political determinants of individual “experience” are brought out, in their stories’ 
(Storycentre, Storytelling Program Impacts, p. 2) From the studies they have carried out, 
they believe that using storytelling to express sensitive topics that might have stigmas such 
as discrimination, victimisation or mental health issues, help to contextualise the issue or 
problem and this is where change happens. I can recognise this identification process in 
Invisible Voices where for instance, the women felt unheard and by being able to identify 
their lack of representation in the Colombian conflict and find ways to make their voice 
heard, it made a difference to them and gave them more strength to fight for their beliefs 
and determination to change society.  
 
Storycentre’s principles highlight the following: 
 

Sharing stories can lead to positive change. Personal narratives can touch viewers 
deeply, moving them to reflect on their own experiences, modify their behaviour, 
treat others with greater compassion, speak out about injustice, and become 
involved in civic and political life. Whether online, via social media, in local 
communities, or at the institutional/policy level, the sharing of stories has the power 
to make a real difference. (Storycentre, Core Principles, p. 3) 

 
Women taking part in Invisible Voices were highly active about their rights and political life 
and spoke candidly, as well as, with passion, anger and pain about the injustice they and 
other women had suffered during the Colombian armed conflict. In their feedback they 
identified as one of their goals, to make a ‘real difference’, this is why they like to take part 
in workshops to help other women, get strength and continue their fight for those they love 
and for a change in society in general (later in the paper I have added some of their 
feedback comments received once the project was published and exhibited online). 
  
Other areas where storytelling is being used very successfully is in healthcare. Pip Hardy and 
Tony Sumner in their book Cultivating Compassion: How Digital Storytelling is Transforming 
Healthcare explore how storytelling, as a reflective process, can cause a change in health 
and mental issues.   
 
In their preface they write:  
 

Powerful personal stories promote reflection, prompt discussion and debate, 
highlight opportunities for learning and improvement, encourage the cultivation of 
empathy and compassion, and remind all those engaged in the business of 
healthcare of our shared humanity. (Hardy & Sumner, 2018, p. XVIII) 

 

5 

 
Again, the above is resonant with Invisible Voices. We started the co-creation workshops 
with an activity where women were invited to bring an object and express their experiences 
of the Colombian conflict through this object. This exercise provoked extremely personal 
testimonies loaded with overwhelming emotion and felt with empathy and group 
discussions from which to learn and reflect. Women found sharing these first-person stories 
and collaborative creative projects, helped them to heal, increased their self-esteem, made 
them feel more empowered and that they were taking part in Colombia’s historical 
memory.  
 
Digital Spaces: Website, Digital Art, App 
 
The digital outcomes of this project as above mentioned, consist of a documentary website, 
digital artwork and a mobile application used to collect stories.  
 
The website follows the research process through slide shows with photographs of the 
workshops, installations, audio stories generated from the objects the participants were 
invited to bring as a starting point. This created powerful stories which can be heard in 
Spanish (with and English translation in a pdf), with titles such as Proud of Being Black, 
When I was 11 Years Old, Heal and Save, Signification of the Bandana, My Little Children, 
Deep Pain, Will carry on Flighting, Accept I Was a Victim, Displacement and Lost Son; as well 
as videos documenting the process of the workshops with titles including Let Me Refresh 
Your Memory, Threading Memories, Listen to Us!, Their Place Within Memory, Our Bodies 
Were Left in Threads and A Museum for Me. 
 
The interactive digital art consists of three parts:  

1.  Their Place Within Memory, reflecting the memory space, personal and collective 

memory, represented by the activity in the Writing on the Wall. 

2.  Do You Hear Us? This represents the political activist space with photographs of 

events organized by the women.  

3.  Voices Constructing Memory has a variety of narrations gathered from the workshop 
with themes including participation in political activism and culture, issues of power, 
territory, displacement, violence, and gender representation such as A Museum for 
Me; body politics with Our Body was Left in Shreds; historical and personal memory: 
I Refresh your Memory, Writing on the Wall, and Threading Memories. 

 
In addition, the two engineers, fellow co-investigators Dr. Claudia Liliana Zúñiga-Cañón from 
Universidad Santiago de Cali, Colombia and Dr. Rafael Asorey-Cacheda from the Universidad 
Politécnica de Cartagena, Spain, together with students from the Universidad Santiago de 
Cali, developed a mobile application or App, called Mujeres Voces Invisibles del Conflicto 
(MVIC).  
 
Through the use of this App, women can share their stories in writing, orally or through 
video, during and after the workshops following an anonymous system. As registration is by 
invitation and only verified users, it always guarantees anonymity and all the testimonials 
are confidential with texts, audios, and videos stored in encrypted form. No personal data or 
metadata is stored. Only the author and the creators of the work can access its contents. It 

 

6 

was also encrypted, making the theft of useful information impossible. Any user of the 
platform can delete their testimonials and account at any time and the deletion is 
permanent. Both the App and the artwork are accessible through the menu in the 
documentary website. 
 
Impact: Art Practices as a Healing Methodology 
 
These digital outputs from this project have helped to analyse and disseminate community 
research in a multimodal way making it accessible for a variety of readers. Most importantly 
the digital stories seem to have been of great help for this particular community. 
Documenting what this group of women did in the workshops and having the stories 
published and exhibited online, has allowed them ownership and control over their work 
and they now see themselves represented.   
 
In the feedback questionnaire, in the question about the final online project where we 
asked what they thought about the final product in general and if they wanted to make any 
other contributions.  These were the answers:  
 

I found it very beautiful and interesting, it moved me to see my fellow participants 
again, to listen to our voices, to see the museums, the map, everything is wonderful, 
but above all the emotion and joy of seeing your work of art come to life, and I say 
my work of art because I feel it that way. More than a contribution I have a request 
that this does not end here, that you continue with this task of constructing memory 
in an artistic way, that contributes to a symbolic and restorative reparation. I would 
also like to be present when the people who contributed to this project get to see it. 

 

 

 

 

‘A wonderful work, I hope its visibility makes an impact and that all of Colombia 
realises that the conflict is national, and that no one can take for granted that 
something like this won't happen to them’. 

‘That it continues to be replicated and that it be one more tool for women victims to 
continue their healing’. 

The result in general for me is gratifying because I met many people that I never, 
ever, thought I would get to know. Being there sharing with everyone and knowing 
that there are other people who are looking for us to tell our stories is very 
comforting; the best thing that could have happened to me was to join Zozcua 
because along the way I have been able to strengthen myself and continue my 
struggle to discover the truth, and I see many of these feelings reflected in the 
results of the project. 

‘My suggestion would be to continue the project to learn more and give more of 
oneself.’ 

 
The digital publication clearly has added to their experience as creators of the work by 
seeing it represented online and the co-creation methodology has functioned as a great 
participatory exercise to empower these women and heal by sharing. 

 

7 

 
Worth highlighting is a question we asked about their experience of the benefits of taking 
part in such artistic activities (sound, weaving, drawing, creating plaster models, 
photographs, and video); and sharing their experiences through the production of art 
practices to transform feelings of pain and grief. These are some of their answers: 
 

‘Yes. Because by activating and communicating with all the senses the healing aspect 
is more intense and accurate.’ 

 

 

 

 

 

‘Of course, they are important, and they help because the victims realize in these 
encounters that there are many families who experience similar tragedies, and this 
helps to generate catharsis.’ 

‘It seems to me to be a lovely project, for example when we were doing the hands, 
the weaving of the sack and the map we all got together, and we were waiting to do 
those activities and there I managed to capture my feelings of pain and understand 
that I was not alone and that it was worth continuing.’ 

‘Healing, a feeling of being accepted, when someone's testimony is followed up with 
hugs and words of encouragement.’ 

Of course, because art is transformative and in this way we can tell or relive our 
stories in a less painful way, with a purpose, and that purpose is to contribute to 
non-repetition. With these activities we construct not only individual memory but 
also collective memory that strengthens us and allows us to dream of a better 
country. 

‘It was painful and at the same time good because it brings out everything one has 
inside.’ 

 
Finally, I pose the question, why should we work with such participants? I believe part of the 
answer is in understanding what needed to be changed and to make them part of this 
change. In this case, we were able to see the Colombian conflict from their unique 
perspective. In this project, the impact of the work in the participants is right at the centre 
and for the artist and researchers it was overwhelming and satisfying but also humbling to 
see that the project was able to so positively touch these peoples’ lives. 
 
The second case study for analysis, is the workshop Share to Heal; Creative Digital Practices: 
Community Platform for Healing and Visualisation which is still yet to happen at the online 
ELO 2021 platform (post?) pandemic conference and festival, in collaboration with Vinicius 
Marquet.  It will focus on the questions about whether the digital can transform research-
community work and facilitate healing through story sharing. We have created an online 
Community Platform Prototype to share stories, which we will make use of at the 
conference. 
 
 

 

8 

Project Two - Share to Heal Workshop; Creative Digital Practices: Community Platform for 
Healing and Visualisation 
 
The aim of this workshop is to make visible — through sharing — social, personal, or 
collective issues/challenges which had become more apparent during the Covid 19 global 
pandemic of 2020/2021 and to create meaningful conversations through the production of 
creative digital proposals to heal them. The issues work as an inspiration for creative 
practice. 
 
Based on the global pandemic, the above creative projects and Marquet’s experience of the 
workshop as a methodology for creativity and exchange of ideas and building on a common 
interest in a community-based goal, we have put together an online platform for sharing 
and exchanging stories. 
 
We will use digital methodologies of collaboration and mapping to highlight the main 
concerns of the community taking part in this discussion. Visualising is also an aim, which 
we might have to look at later, after realising the workshop. Thus, for this purpose, we have 
already provided the participants with an online platform where they will be able to share a 
personal or collective issue/ challenge in connection to the pandemic. The shared stories 
will be distributed amongst the participants - through the Share to Heal platform- the 
participants will have to find inspiration in the issues to find a way to heal them by coming 
up with a creative digital proposal (all anonymised). 
 
The only prerequisite is for the participants to have the story ready in advance. We want 
them to have time to think about the story and bring something relevant to their experience 
of the pandemic. They should be able to write their own personal story or copy-paste a text 
from a newspaper depending on personal preference using no more than 250 words or 
1500 characters. To save time, this input needs to be digitally available at the beginning of 
the workshop.  
 
During the production of the Share to Heal platform, the questions we initially addressed 
were related to the design and programming needed to implement the exchanging of 
stories and their mapping against the digital projects suggested by the participants. As with 
the previous project we are addressing the opportunities co-creative methodologies provide 
for collaboration between artists and community. To highlight the main concerns of the 
community taking part in this discussion we have a keyword section which will be visualised 
in an upcoming platform so the issues covered in each particular workshop can be seen at a 
glance.  
 
Creative Digital Proposals to Heal 
 
As previously mentioned, this is the second step of the workshop where the participants are 
allocated an inspirational story to heal through the creation of a digital media project.  
Participants can use interdisciplinary, collaborative and/or co-creative methodologies and 
the proposals can suggest any modality: aural, visual, written or any digital media genre, 
that is; animation, illustration generative, interactive, networked, narrative, performative, 
immersive VR AR, locative. 

 

9 

 
The workshop as research methodology following Rikke Ørngree’s model will also be 
studied to analyse the creative approaches and processes, individual and in group. 
 
Experiences Gained 
 
This can be an area for discussion at the conference presentation. What experiences have 
we all gained? Who benefits from the stories? Does digital storytelling work as a healing 
process?  
 
From Invisible Voices the learning experience benefited both the facilitators and the 
women. They communicated to us that they didn’t feel “revictimized”, on the contrary, they 
felt that sharing the pain and transform it into something beautiful for people to see was 
very gratifying. They felt they have been heard, they were not alone, they were empowered 
with the creation of this work and authorship. Their feelings changed, felt stronger. They 
became the voices of those other women who have no voices. In particular, they liked these 
methodologies as it wasn’t just purely about their individual stories but was also about 
creating something out of their experiences. Thus, using not only aural storytelling as life- 
stories but the fact they had to create artwork seemed to have empowered them more. 
 
For the investigators this was a learning experience like no other. The method was to listen, 
to hear from these women. We were there as facilitators. We learnt about the Colombian 
conflict from their experience, their resilience to pain, their power to carry on fighting 
against injustice, their camaraderie and support for each other. As an artist I have never felt 
so humble and for me, this has been a project not only of great importance but with a wider 
social significance. 
 
 
References 
 
Gloster AT, Lamnisos D, Lubenko J, Presti G, Squatrito V, Constantinou M, et al. (2020) 
‘Impact of COVID-19 pandemic on mental health: An International study’, Journal of Global 
Public Health, PLoS ONE (Accessed 30/04/ 2021) 
Hardy, P, & Sumner, T (eds) (2018) ‘Cultivating Compassion: How Digital Storytelling Is 
Transforming Healthcare’, Springer International Publishing AG, Cham.  
Lambert, J. & Brooke H. (2018) ‘Digital Storytelling: Capturing Lives, Creating Community’, 
New York: Routledge. 
Mencía M. (2016-17) ‘The Winnipeg: The Poem that Crossed the Atlantic’, Available: 
http://winnipeg.mariamencia.com/?lang=en  (Accessed 9/05/2021) 
Mencía M. (2020) ‘Voces Invisibles: Women Victims of the Colombian Conflict’, Available:  
https://www.voces-invisibles.com/ (Accessed 9/05/2021) 
Tribe M. & Jana R. (2006) ‘New Media Art’, Köln; London, UK: Taschen  
Shell-Weiss, M. (2019) ‘The Power of Narrative: A critical guide to creating decolonial 
community-based projects on Intergenerational Relations and Intergenerational Education’, 
in B. M. Nchindila & T. Corrigan (Eds), The essence of academic performance. IntechOpen. 
 
 

 

10 

