Roy 1

Writing the Self-e: Making a case for Intentionality, Emancipation and Gender in Indian

Electronic Literature.

And

Indian Electronic Writing and its Modernist anxiety with Print

Samya Brata Roy

Student

Department of English Literature, The English and Foreign Languages University, Hyderabad

Author Note

Samya Brata Roy is currently in the 4th Semester of his M.A in English Literature from The
English and Foreign Languages University, Hyderabad.

I have no conflicts of interest to disclose. I am indebted to all my respondents and mentors. In
Spite of one big paper, my entry is divided into two short papers because it is a work in progress
written initially as two separate papers and will be featured as chapters in my MA dissertation.

Correspondence concerning this articles should be addressed to samyabrataroy@gmail.com

Roy 2

Writing the Self-e: Making a case for Intentionality, Emancipation and Gender in Indian

Electronic Literature.

Online Narratives or Electronic Literature, in this context, has been used interchangeably

because historically, the point of difference between the later and the former is connected to the

creative production that took place before the advent of the Internet (Hayles 2007). But, in the

context of my research, I am concerned primarily with the production in the age of the internet

and the public sphere that it has brought forth. So, what is this thing called Electronic Literature

or E-Lit? For me, the definition is very simple. Electronic or Online Literature is something that

uses the electronic or the online mode for producing narratives. The definition however can be

interrogated in different cultural contexts as all things are. If one looks at the ELO collections,

there is an overbearing presence of computational aesthetics (Heckman & O’Sullivan, 2018), and

not

to mention a distinct

lack of

Indian presence (Shanmugapriya & Menon, 2019).

Computational aesthetics can mean varied things from inserting an image to using VR to convey

something. What

I mean here is the abundant use of code and other software-based

enhancements which help in making it more immersive in nature. Is that the case everywhere?

Can this centrality of computational aesthetics be assumed across all spaces? I do not think so.

On coming across the ELO collection, the first thing that struck me was how fundamentally

different things were in India. From what I have experienced in India, I do not see that much of a

use of computer-generated aesthetics and therefore, it can arguably be said that it resembles print

in some shape or form. The Internet is known to be a great democratizer, but the recent reality

has shown that it is not really the case (Beniwal 2020). If people do not have paper, how will

they write stories in it? Similarly, if people do not have a constant flow of the internet, how will

they create there? It is important to note that my relationship with Electronic Literature or Online

Roy 3
Narratives is not a new one and is not limited to theoretical postulations. It goes way back to

2015, when I was in school and decided to open a blog of my own. One of the major driving

forces behind this act was me being denied the opportunity to publish in print. A deep sense of

angst took over and my younger self wanted an outlet where I could share my works with people

without being at the mercy of anyone else. It is also to be noted that writing for many is private

activity but for me it was, and still is, not the case. I write to be read; it is a public activity since

the first day.

Now that I have given the context of the question at hand, let me arrive at the question itself.

Until I had the idea about the discourse surrounding E-Lit, I treated it as a hobby. But, when I

came to know, I had other questions in my mind which needed answers. I knew why I wrote and

what my motivation for writing was. Now, I wanted to discover why do others write? When

people write online, do they write just because they want to? or, is there something more to it? I

wanted to go to the roots of it and uncover this question of intentionality. Since I cannot possibly

investigate every single demographic aspect in a single paper, I had to limit my search to two

areas: a) gender identity b) writing in English. The latter is an important consideration because,

to feature the multilingual ethos of the country, it would require much greater range and support.

It cannot be undertaken in this paper and thus this concerns itself only with the online writings in

English. So, the central question becomes something like this: do people who identify as ‘Male’,

‘Female’ etc. differ in their intentionality of writing in the online space or is it similar?  Is my

drive of being denied in print and thus wanting to ‘share’- a ‘universal’ driving factor? Or is

directly connected to the gendered lived experience?

Methodology

Roy 4

To go about my search, I launched a survey on the 15th of March and accepted responses

till the 15th next month. The question in focus, in relation to this paper, were two: ‘How would

you describe your gender and/or sexuality?’ and ‘Why did you start telling stories/sharing

creative work online?’. Purposefully, I left the questions open ended so that the respondents

could be free while answering it, knowing that analysing the data might be difficult and it was so

indeed. My sampling method was that of snowball sampling where I had to repeatedly amplify

the survey along my personal contacts as well as in the public spaces. After collecting the data,

the immediate thing to do was to clean the same. I had a total of 80 valid responses and had to

further divide my question on gender/sexuality in three more sub-columns to help quantify the

data at hand. The categorization, for the clarity of analysis, in the sub-column called Gender was

broadly based on people who explicitly identified themselves as ‘Male’ (two respondents who

identified as Male declared that one of them were not sure about it, the other had non-binary

leanings and one clearly declared being ‘Cis-Male’), ‘Female’ (one respondent had identified as

‘Womxn’ and another declared being ‘Cis-Female’ which has been included here for the sake of

clarity-for which this disclaimer becomes crucial), and Other (people who did not explicitly

identify with anything, were not sure, or identified as ‘Cis-Gender’). With the categorisation in

the place, the data (within a total of 80 valid responses) came to be as follows: 56 were Female,

18 were Male and 6 belonged to the Other spectrum. It is also important to be noted that while

many Female respondents declared being heterosexual, bisexual, queer etc., most of the Male

respondents were only heterosexual in nature apart from the handful mentioned of course. The

data regarding Sexuality, which has been obtained is not enough to carry out further analysis and

Roy 5

demands separate attention. That is why I would like to stick to the question of Gender identity

for the time being. This survey does not claim to make sweeping remarks regarding the nature of

online writing in the country simply because the sample size is too small to say something like

that. To even get close to saying something like that, the sample size must be exponentially more

which requires a bigger research project, better collaborations and funding and is well beyond

the scope of a solo paper. The data about Gender was one strand which I intend to highlight, but

it cannot be read in isolation. The next strand is that of understanding the intentionality behind

writing online and to see if it is related to the Gendered lived experience. As mentioned earlier,

my question was ‘Why did you start telling stories/sharing creative work online?’. Once again,

this was also an open-ended question as I wanted my respondents to answer freely without any

constrains. So, one can say that the survey was more like a text-based interview of sorts. From

the 80 valid responses, which were all in sentence and/or paragraph formats, I had to then lump

and split the data (Saldana 2013) according to the prevalence of themes in the responses. Once I

had quantified the responses in terms of the dominant themes present in them, then it became

easier for me to carry out the data analysis in this regard. It is to be mentioned that this analysis

was done in a different way as compared to the last question on Gender. I did not treat one

response as a singular entity but split them in sub parts as the themes were found in them. For

example, if one response talked about how they wrote because they needed to share and it made

them good, I split the response up into two units: ‘share’ and ‘feel good’. Like this I found many

sub-units and tried to see how many of these sub-units were present in the Male, Female and

Other responses which might throw some light on the intentionality behind their acts of writing.

While studying and keeping track of the sub-units present in these responses, I had also

Roy 6
maintained a track of which response (and the corresponding subunit) belonged to which Gender

category.

Analysis

First, let’s look at the responses which explicitly identified as ‘Male’. Within the total 16

Male responses that I studied; I found a constancy of responses without much variation. The

sub-units which related to the aspects of sharing, creating a community feeling, pursuing a

hobby, and just feeling good in general occupied a massive 87.5% of the responses. The rest

12.5% was shared equally within the emotions of self-improvement and to tackle boredom, each

having a 6.25% representation. The first thing to note here is how less the Male responses are in

number in comparison to the Female responses, which covers almost 80% of the data set. If we

investigate whatever data we have for the Male responses, it is evident that the main drive behind

them writing is to have a sense of community and feel good about doing so.

But the equation changes when we study the female responses. Similarly, here also the

respondents are talking about building a community and sharing amongst each other which

ultimately brings in some needed validation. This aspect of community building figures 42.62%

percent of the data set as compared to the 87.5% in Males. But the other part is where things start

to get interesting. The respondents talk about healing, venting and how writing online also has a

therapeutic side to it. I find this cathartic functionality to be vital and it features with a good

24.59%. Adding to the question of healing via venting, the most important discovery in this part

comes in the aspect of freedom, oppression, inferiority complex and a desire to bring about

change. Respondents speak about how the online space provides them with a much-needed space

where no one will oppress them and in turn they can inspire change. Not only that, but people

Roy 7

also say how this space helps them overcome fear of public writing and the fear of not being

good enough. This common theme of emancipation and solidarity features a good 14.86% of the

dataset. It might seem insignificant as compared to other responses, but it is important to note

how the act of defiance and speaking up against the gaze of the patriarchal forces can inspire a

chain reaction and that is why conversations must be amplified regarding the use of this mode as

a weapon for emancipation. It does not end here, the data also shows 18.03% here are using the

online spaces to build an archive, or a portfolio for that matter, which might help them personally

or in professional spaces. If we talk about writing the body or expressing lived experiences, we

can see directly via the data how it is being done in the online space where people who identify

as women or female are taking up the metaphorical pen to write their selves. The Other 6

responses have too less data for commentary but 66.67% here talks about venting and feeling

better like the last two while the remaining 33.34% is split equally into having fun and getting a

certain amount of reach.

Conclusion

Studying the personal narratives thus, we can arrive at a better societal understanding

regarding the online public sphere (Laslett 1999). On the more, because we are talking about

online culture and writing in the online space, I think it is even more important to write about the

same. Writing about writing, i.e., theorizing about the same, helps in starting a discourse or

conversations regarding the same and bring it into the fold of the Humanities departments in

general. It is important because the Humanities itself, in the educational curricula and otherwise

does not always seem to acknowledge the online or pay much heed to the Digital method

(Brennan 2017). These conversations help amplify, not only academic output, but also creative

Roy 8
output which can help promote the notion of Digital Literacy (PTI 2020). We have been taught to

read and write in the online space, but we have not been given any training to traverse the

internet along the same. If this is taken care of, I believe people might have greater confidence of

being able to move around the Internet without unnecessary anxieties of weird pop-ups.

Therefore, as the paper tries to understand the Gendered Intentionality of Online Writing, two

things emerge very clearly from the data at hand. Self-identified females populate the space

more, when it comes to their creative output, in the online space. In my understanding this

presence has deep connections to the oppressive power politics that women face in a regular day

to day basis even today where writing emerges as an act of defiance and emancipation (Foster,

and Hager 2014). That is why the online space emerges as a medium bereft of the judgemental

eyes. One can ask then, does that mean that we do not have censorship online? Are they preying

eyes absent there? Absolutely not! A photoshoot still attracts unnecessary eyeballs and women

are harassed regularly much more so online than in regular spaces. But what happens in case of

art or creativity in general? My understanding in this regard is that people still view social media

only through the lens of media and not the social. The attention or the look out, for most people,

is what can be observed briefly without the act of reading. Whatever involves the act of the

reading, especially if it is creative or textual in nature, can get overlooked. However, this will not

be the norm once the country learns to traverse the internet better. I believe that there is a

fundamental generational gap in accessing art in the online space. People are taking advantage of

that and very rightly so. I have seen my elder generation quickly access YouTube and Facebook

but struggle with platforms which also involve media. This idea matches with my data, as most

of the writers present in the analysis have their platforms in blogging sites or Instagram which

remains a little less accessible to the older demographic (Sehl 2021). As time passes when digital

literacy does not remain an afterthought, I believe this thing will change and then it would be

interesting to see how the nature of writing changes and where it moves from there on in. But, as

of this moment, the materiality of space and its fortunate inaccessibility of the textual remains a

determining factor for people, especially people who identify as Females to express themselves

Roy 9

better.

References

Roy 10

Aarseth, E. J. (1997). Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature (UK ed. edition). Johns

Hopkins University Press.

Beniwal, V. (2020). As digital divide widens, India risks losing a generation to pandemic

disruption. ThePrint.

https://theprint.in/india/education/as-digital-divide-widens-india-risks-losing-a-generation-t

o-pandemic-disruption/568394/

Bouchardon, S. (2011). Digital Literature and the Digital. Journal of Writing in Creative Practice

(JWCP), 4(1), 65–78. https://doi.org/10.1386/jwcp.4.1.65_1

Brennan, T. (2017, October 15). The Digital-Humanities Bust. The Chronicle of Higher

Education. https://www.chronicle.com/article/the-digital-humanities-bust/

Foster, T. M., & Hager, C. (2014). Review of Word by Word: Emancipation and the Act of

Writing, HagerChristopher. Journal of the Civil War Era, 4(1), 124–126.

Girgar, D. (2008). Electronic literature: Where is it? Electronic Book Review.

https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315707860-25

Hayles, N. K. (1999). How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature,

and Informatics. University of Chicago Press.

Hayles, N. K. (2004). Print Is Flat, Code Is Deep: The Importance of Media-Specific Analysis.

Poetics Today, 25(1), 67–90. https://doi.org/10.1215/03335372-25-1-67

Hayles, N. K. (2007). Electronic Literature: What is it? Electronic Literature Organisation.

https://eliterature.org/pad/elp.html

Roy 11

Hayles, N. K. (2008). Electronic Literature: New Horizons for the Literary (1st edition).

University of Notre Dame Press.

Laslett, B. (1999). Personal Narratives as Sociology. Contemporary Sociology, 28(4), 391–401.

https://doi.org/10.2307/2655287

Morais, S. (2013). Archive Practice and Digital Humanities—The Centre for Internet and

Society. The Centre for Internet and Society.

https://cis-india.org/raw/digital-humanities/archive-practice-and-digital-humanities

Mukherjee, S. (2017). “No Country for E-Lit?” – India and Electronic Literature. Hyperrhiz:

New Media Cultures, 16. https://doi.org/10.20415/hyp/016.e08

O’Sullivan, J. (Ed.). (2021). Electronic Literature as Digital Humanities: Contexts, Forms, &

Practices. Bloomsbury Academic. https://doi.org/10.5040/9781501363474

PTI. (2020). Vice President Naidu calls for mass movement to promote digital literacy—Times of

India. The Times of India.

https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/home/education/news/vice-president-naidu-calls-for-ma

ss-movement-to-promote-digital-literacy/articleshow/79448071.cms

Rettberg, S. (2018). Electronic Literature (1st edition). Polity.

Saldana, J. (2013). The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers. Sage.

https://uk.sagepub.com/en-gb/eur/the-coding-manual-for-qualitative-researchers/book24361

Roy 12

6

Schreibman, S., Siemens, R., & Unsworth, J. (Eds.). (2016). A New Companion to Digital

Humanities (2nd ed.). Wiley Blackwell.

https://www.wiley.com/en-in/A+New+Companion+to+Digital+Humanities%2C+2nd+Editi

on-p-9781118680599

Sehl, K. (2021, January 27). Instagram Demographics in 2021: Important User Stats for

Marketers. Social Media Marketing & Management Dashboard.

https://blog.hootsuite.com/instagram-demographics/

Shanmugapriya, T., Menon, N., & Campbell, A. (2019). An introduction to the functioning

process of embedded paratext of digital literature: Technoeikon of digital poetry. Digital

Scholarship in the Humanities, 34(3), 646–660. https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqy064

Singh, R. (2016). Based on Brevity: Fiction in 140 Characters or Less. Journal of Literature,

Culture and Literary Translation, No. 1(Year 7), 1–19. https://doi.org/10.15291/sic/1.7.lc.7

Shanmugapriya, T., & Menon, N. (2018). Locating New Literary Practices in Indian Digital

Spaces. Matlit, 6, 159–174. https://doi.org/10.14195/2182-8830_6-1_11

Shanmugapriya, T., & Menon, N. (2019). First and Second Waves of Indian Electronic

Literature. Journal of Comparative Literature and Aesthetics, 42(4), 63–71.

Tabbi, J. (Ed.). (2017). The Bloomsbury Handbook of Electronic Literature. Bloomsbury

Roy 13

Academic.

https://www.bloomsbury.com/uk/the-bloomsbury-handbook-of-electronic-literature-978147

4230254/

Indian Electronic Writing and its Modernist anxiety with Print

Roy 14

INTRODUCTION

If the internet is treated like a material just like paper, then how does the act of writing in

these two modes differ? Even if they do, how does it differ in the Indian context? Does it bear a

relationship with print? If so why? This paper tries to understand these questions by primarily

using the works of Jessica Pressman, Shanmugapriya T and Nirmala Menon. The first part tries

to understand how the anxiety of print or the book can be a determining factor while writing

online. In the second part, I try to contextualise the discussion by rooting it in the Indian context.

And in the final, I use some samples from my data to show how the act of writing is and what we

can read from it. The conclusion that I arrive at is that, because the Internet, as a mode of writing

is still new, the influence of the print can be seen very vividly hence the Modernist angst of the

past is tangibly seen. But, as we move forward and naturalise the digital, in the Indian context,

we could see more experimentations akin to our understanding of the Postmodern.

THE ANXIETY OF PRINT

CS Lewis, in his Preface to Paradise Lost (1942) talks in detail about Milton’s pursuit to

recreate the oral tradition in a piece of paper. The greatest challenge for Milton, according to

Lewis, was to give a sense of the performative of the bygone tradition while reading a piece of

paper in an armchair. Here we get to see Lewis explore what I call a modal anxiety. During the

ancient times, the mode of transmission used to be oral: people spoke, sang or chanted. But,

when we come to the literary culture, and especially that of writing the Epic (something that used

to be sung), we see people like Milton trying to recreate the same when that idea does not exist

anymore. Now, when we have the digital mode alongwith the print, I believe the same anxiety

comes into the picture. This anxiety can be traced in two ways: as a fetish of the commodity

Roy 15
called ‘the book’ and a constant desire to recreate the print aesthetic while writing in the digital

mode. Jessica Pressman deals with these strands of thought in two of her works: Bookishness and

Digital Modernism.

This is what I describe as “bookishness”: creative acts that engage the physicality of the
book within a digital culture, in modes that may be sentimental, fetishistic, radical.
Cell-phone covers crafted to look like old books; decorative pillows printed with beloved
book covers; earrings, rings, and necklaces made of minia-ture codices; store windows
that use books as props; altered book sculptures exhibited in prestigious collections; and
bookbound novels that revolve around a book as a central character. (Pressman 1)

Pressman directly connects the Marxist notion of Commodity Fetishism to the idea of the Book

and shows how the object has been commodified in itself. In a milieu, where the Book does not

enjoy the centrality as it used to, this fetish is a desperate attempt to cling on to a bygone era.

This aspect becomes crucial when we see that Insta quotations resemble the fonts made by a

typewriter or the background resembles that of the page of an old book. This is the realm of

resembling physically, apart from making the post have a perfect page like alignment. Also, The

crucial point of digital culture is the aspect of interactivity where the content is not static and it is

flowing through the media platforms and various spaces of culture. Hayles (2004) terms a unit of

this cultural form as the flickering signifier where she says, extending the Lacanian notion of the

floating signifier, that neither the signifier nor the signified stays static and it’s constantly

flickering in and out of existence. Hence, if interactivity or fluidity is the ethos of the digital

space then it places itself in the counterposition of the print culture which is static in nature i.e it

does not move after it has been printed. In the internet or the digital space, the artefacts might not

remain the same: links might die, advertisements might pop up, the interface might change and

the entire tech can go obsolete (Fitzpatrick 2011). Hence, if meaning making is relied upon by

this many factors, then it cannot remain static at all, it will visually change at every reading.

Roy 16
Once again, like the schism between orality and print, the same can be observed in the case of

print and the digital. Therefore, when people create in the digital space, this modal anxiety can

be traced just like Lewis did in the case of Milton. In the Modernist condition as well, we find an

attachment towards the past and a lamentation to what society has come down to. The work of

Eliot, Pound and Owen, albeit in a more specific context, bears reflection of the same. One can

ruminate that the modernist is someone in the present with their heads turned towards the past.

Therefore...

What’s true of modernism more generally is true of digital modernism as well: it is “a
strategy of innovation that intentionally employs the media of its time to reform and
refashion older literary practices in ways that produce new art.” Just as Joyce returned to
Homer,
about an
eighteenth-century B.C.E.  (Wollaeger, Dettmar and Pressman xi)

and Pound borrowed “make

it new”

from an anecdote

Thus when we see the print traces in digital writing now, it can be said that it uses the bedrock of

tradition to create something new. Yes, a new mode comes with the tantalizing possibility of

making something new or totally re-inventing everything that comes along with it. But, as

Pressman argues, digital or electronic literature (used interchangeably here) does not just scratch

everything out and start afresh but it uses the old and mixes to form a hybrid which might pave

the way for a new artefact altogether. Hence, we can see this as a precursor to Digital

Postmodernism. One can attribute the digital very simply to the Postmodern condition just

because it

is digital, but,

if we look at

the cultural dialectic of anxiety and then slowly

progressing to acceptance,

then we can take the phase we are in as the phase of Digital

Modernism. If now, people are only typing texts on the web without using a lot of media, that

means the effect of the print is very visible though it is in a different modal context. In Spite of

writing in the digital mode, the authors are looking back at print.This is decidedly the Modern

anxiety. I believe, with naturalising of the digital, we will finally be able to embrace the mode in

Roy 17
all its glory and then we can say to be in the realm of the Postmodern. Electronic Literature or

E-Lit, by definition,

is born-digital and its aesthetics depends on computational elements.

Pressman sums the above by stating that

Electronic literature has been celebrated as a postmodern literary form that grows out of
technologies, subjectivities, and poetics from the middle of the twentieth century, but this
book provides an alternative genealogy. Across diverse genres and programming
platforms, I examine a subset of contemporary online electronic literature that remixes
literary modernism … Writers involved in digital modernism assess the state of electronic
literature, and of literature in general in our digital age, and they decide to raze and
rebuild. (Pressman 2)

The first generation of E-Lit according to K Hayles was primarily hypertextual narratives with

multiple, often non-linear, reading paths. However, these texts can definitely have non electronic

predecessors as

Vladimir Nabokov’s Pale Fire, David Foster Wallace’s Infinite Jest, Julio Cortazar’s
Hopscotch, and the Choose Your Own Adventure young adult book series, all of which
use footnotes or other textual devices to connect chunks of text and enable navigation of
the narrative as a network rather than a linear path. (Pressman 6)

Apart from these examples, as we are talking about Modernism, one can also look at Eliot’s The

Wasteland also as a hypertext poem which keeps referring to other works or concepts and

depends on them severely for the meaning making to take place. Curiously enough, such work

has actually taken place where projects have been dedicated to creating online variorum editions.

One of the most important uses of hypertextuality can be seen in Richard A Parker’s Exploring

“The Waste Land” as there is a website dedicated to the poem which traces all the references as

concepts sprinkled through the poem as hypertexts. Whenever there is a reference, that area is

embedded with a URL which either pops up or takes the reader to the dedicated area to provide

the much needed context. Not only should one read the digital artefact with equal attention, but

Roy 18
the readers also must take into account the question of materiality or materialities in the context

of the digital. That is to say that the online mode is a collection of platforms or materials which

one can use for their creative output, i.e to say that an Instagram is not the same as Wordpress.

The digital makes the text nebulous and it becomes difficult to recognise where it begins or ends;

it has no clear demarcation like what Genette (1997) suggests in his idea of the paratex. This

problem can be understood if we look at what Shanmugapriya and Menon calls as the

technoeikon:

We propose technoeikon to analyze the literary and digital artifacts of digital
literary texts:
images, kinetic texts and images, videos, graphic designs, and
acoustic, the threads of which are either a component or reinforce digital literary
texts that make the reader/ viewer to be more focused than in print text. The
elements of technoeikon saturate digital literature like the cosmos filled with
natural objects. Hence, digital literary works emulate ‘the nature of the world’ to
present the text with wholesomeness. We use technoeikon to represent ‘skill of
weaving images’—the images instantiate the motion images of the real world in
digital literature. Weaving skeuomorph images embody the ideology of natural
systems which offers a realistic perspective to the reader. This is a unique
disposition of digital literary works. The creator’s aesthetic experience of the
world and his/her message manifested through both technoeikon and text are
inextricable to the theme of the work. (Shanmugapriya, Menon and Campbell
651)

Thus it is clear that the text cannot be demarcated in the digital space as to what is the text and

what

is not. Everything contributes to the process of meaning making. Now that I have

contextualised the concept of Digital Modernism and meaning making through the idea of the

text and how it can be traced in Electronic Literature, i.e through the anxiety of the print culture,

the next step would be to understand how the same applies in the Indian context.

THE INDIAN CONTEXT

Roy 19
It is necessary to understand the Indian context separately because the nature of Indian

E-Lit is not the same as in most of the Western countries, which is where the discourse emerges

from. In order to understand the nature of E-Lit in India, it is important to consider them

separately. Souvik Mukherjee (2017) traces E-Lit in India back to the ancient forms of oral

storytelling and states that it is rather rhizomatic in nature and the awareness of the same is not

there yet echoing Rettberg (2009) where he also says many “people have no idea that electronic

literature exists”. Consequently, Shanmugapriya and Menon (2018) builds on Mukherjee’s idea

and finds emergent elements of the multimodal E-Lit in the Gita Govinda, Patta Chitra and

Chitra Kavi. Their 2019 paper, attempts at historicizing the E-Lit tradition in India.

Cloak Room presumably marked the birth of Indian digital literature. Subsequently, few
SMS novels such as Neelakannukal (2006) and Deaf Heaven (2009) are also published.
(Shanmugapriya and Menon 65)

Therefore,

the first generation of E-Lit

is here ascribed to the SMS novels. The second

generation of the same is however attributed to the works generated by social media, i.e

Facebook, Twitter, Instagram etc. While there can be some elements of similarity with Twitter

fiction and SMS novels due to the constrictions of characters in one SMS/Tweet, the space

thrown open by other social media profiles remains something to be reckoned with. Before going

into that,

it

is also important

to consider blogging and story sharing sites like Blogger,

Wordpress, Wattpad and the newly popular Medium. Wattpad can be seen as a user generated

storytelling site with not much scope to innovate whereas Blogger, though it is a bit outdated

now, and Wordpress are spaces where one can truly experiment with and implement media.

Medium is a much cleaner and simpler space where one can surely add images but there are

limitations. Facebook was the initial space of sharing snippets of creativity from spaces like

Roy 20
TerriblyTinyTales etc. but with the advent of Instagram, one can say that most of the aesthetics

which is directly linked to the act of writing can be found there.

THE ACT OF WRITING

In order to find the spaces of creative production, I launched a survey on the 15th of March

where I wanted to find how solo creators shared narratives in the online space. The aspect of the

creators being solo is very important because I wanted to also see how much could people

produce without the aspect of outside support. I collected open ended text based interview

responses till the 15th of April, exactly for a month to have a sense of symmetry. I received 89

responses and the next step was to clean the data so it would be easy for me to carry out the

analysis. I asked my respondents to leave a link to their site of creative production and from that

data I will attempt to closely read a handful of those to show how the print anxiety contributes to

the aspect of Digital Modernism. The first case that I will try to deal with is the bite sized

quotation-ish content of Instagram and this new platform called YourQuote. Both platforms

heavily rely on texts within pictures. While Instagram has the role of the caption as well,

YourQuote, as the name suggests, functions like a community which shares quotations based on

prompts given by each other.

The Instagram pages function on three levels: the outline, the post and then the caption along

with it. Some pages go for a dedicated aesthetic where they upload content one in three posts and

purposefully include fillers in the remaining two. When someone opens the profile,

the

chessboard-like aesthetic plays a crucial role in the perception of meaning. In this case, I would

go so far as to say that the way the text looks is more important than the text in itself. The

technoeikon, thus, operates in the realm of beautification mostly. The comes the singular (or

double/triple panelled) post with its caption and the comments. Because of the limitations of the

Roy 21
picture, many authors use the caption to flesh out the content which they could not in the main

post. Therefore, it serves as an extension to the main post at hand. Then comes hashtags or

metadata integration wherein author try to latch the posts on by tagging other profiles or themes

by @ing them or #ing them. Last but not the least comes the uploaded picture in itself. More

often than not, they are presented in two ways: text with something that adds to the beauty of the

picture or the text presented such a way that it resembles the phenomenon of bookishness. The

first page that I will be looking at in this context is midnightpoetryandchai. Looking at the profile

from the outset, it is clear that the focus here is in the amalgamation of art and text. Paintings and

pretty objects are used as backdrops to house the text which makes it even prettier to look at.

Roses, clouds, paintings and any Instagrammable photo has been used here to create a backdrop

to house the text. The text is more like a quotation which lures in the reader to open the singular

post, which then takes you to the longer caption which is present like the normal format of the

print text. Therefore, the aspect of the digital is limited to aesthetics and does not use coding or

other means of computation. One might argue that the comment section is also important but I

would not consider it here as those are reflections and do not add to the text proper. I can go so

far as to say that the visuality of the text here becomes more important than the text in itself. Can

we call this to be hypertext? Technically yes as it leads the reader from one point to the other

where the picture acts as a lure or trailer to the text. But, once you reach the main text, more

often than not there is no visible difference from the print format. The next case would be that of

tinta.poetry. Mostly the structure of this page is similar to the last one. But, there is one

fundamental difference. The aesthetic quality that the author has chosen here directly resembles

that of an old book or a manuscript. Aside from the fact that the profile picture is that of Eliot

himself, the reference to the book or the manuscript via the use of the visual can be seen as an

Roy 22
example of bookishness in the virtual mode. This mode strikes a sense of familiarity and I would

say that it adds to the perception of the reader as well. YourQuote is another similar platform

which relies on the aspect of quotations and images to bring in a sense of visuality. But, the

platform is dedicated to that activity only while Instagram is used for many other things as well.

Coming to the more longform side of things, we have the good old blogs. The concept of

blogging is almost as old as the internet in itself. In my responses most of the blogs were from

Blogger and Wordpress and only a few from Medium. The Blogger sites mostly resemble an

older internet interface with not much dynamic activity going on. But, two Wordpress accounts

are what interests me here. An Unstable Extravert has a very curious web page design. The

webpage in itself resembles what I could call a school notice board where all the posts seem to

be stuck with sellotape. Some of these posts are separated by pencils and the posts in itself

mostly do not use any other form of media and are mostly short poems. The about page of the

author is designed like a notebook with lines in between to write the text. These extra-textual

signifiers of the pencil, sellotape and the notebook gives the vibe of a school goer and hence the

nostalgia factor influences the meaning making. The posts in itself, however do not use any

media elements. Therefore, these signifiers though not directly bookish in nature hint at the

things related to it in a roundabout way. Next up, I would like to look at Soham Deb. The blog

page appears simple in itself but the possibilities it throws open is what I want to talk about here.

Mostly, what we see here is a collection of photographs and descriptions that accompany these

photographs. It is pretty simple but the possibilities are something that can be explored. One can

use these images on a space to tell stories about things that may or may not be related to the

space in itself. Therefore, it opens up interesting questions of meaning making.This strand is

taken up Sen Sanchari who not only creates an archive/ portfolio of her works in her website but

Roy 23
also manages to weave a sense of narrative through the pictures. The narrative serves as a mood

builder which helps in understanding the authorial intention.

CONCLUSION

All the things that I have looked at, in the Indian context, have limited the incorporation

of media to the realm of images and images only. Not even does URLs feature as a part of the

narrative which might open up the possibilities of a branched and non linear narrative. I believe

that is due to our training of reading and writing in print which limits the experimentation to the

images. That is why, even in the digital mode we try to replicate the features of the print. This

phenomenon can be very well looked at as a Digital Modernist anxiety which fails to treat the

digital mode as a mode of its own. But, while the authorial intention can be that, because the

medium is different, the meaning making changes and it does not serve the same function as it

would have in print. That is to say that a picture in a book does not serve the same function as it

does in a web article or in an Instagram post simply because we interact with the same in a

different way. Once, we learn to create in the digital space and accept the nuances of this mode,

only then can we say to be in the zone of Digital Postmodernism.

“An Unstable Extravert.” An Unstable Extravert,

Works Cited

https://anunstableextravert.wordpress.com/. Accessed 7 May 2021.

Roy 24

Exploring “The Waste Land” - The Poem by T.S. Eliot. 7 June 2010,

https://web.archive.org/web/20100607104653/http://world.std.com/~raparker/exploring

/thewasteland/explore.html.

Genette, Gerard, and Richard Macksey. Paratexts: Thresholds of Interpretation: 20.

Translated by Jane E. Lewin, Cambridge University Press, 1997.

Girgar, Dene. “Electronic Literature: Where Is It?” Electronic Book Review, 2008, pp.

263–76, doi:10.4324/9781315707860-25.

Hayles, N. Katherine. Electronic Literature: New Horizons for the Literary. 1st edition,

University of Notre Dame Press, 2008.

---. “Electronic Literature: What Is It?” Electronic Literature Organisation, 2007,

https://eliterature.org/pad/elp.html.

---. How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics.

University of Chicago Press, 1999.

Lewis, C. S. A Preface to Paradise Lost: Being the Ballard Matthews Lectures Delivered at

University College, North Wales, 1941. OUP USA, 2007.

Midnightpoetryandchai’s (@midnightpoetryandchai) Profile on Instagram • 164 Posts.

https://www.instagram.com/midnightpoetryandchai/. Accessed 7 May 2021.

Roy 25
Mukherjee, Souvik. “‘No Country for E-Lit?’ – India and Electronic Literature.” Hyperrhiz:

New Media Cultures, no. 16, 2017. hyperrhiz.io, doi:10.20415/hyp/016.e08.

Kathleen Fitzpatrick Planned Obsolescence. NYU Press. 2011,

https://nyupress.org/9780814727881/planned-obsolescence. Accessed 7 May 2021.

Pressman, Jessica. Bookishness: Loving Books in a Digital Age. Columbia University Press,

2020.

---. Digital Modernism: Making It New in New Media. Oxford University Press, 2014.

Rettberg, Scott. Electronic Literature. 1st edition, Polity, 2018.

“Sanchari Sen.” Sanchari Sen, https://sensanchari.com/. Accessed 7 May 2021.

Schreibman, Susan, et al., editors. A New Companion to Digital Humanities. 2nd ed., Wiley

Blackwell, 2016,

https://www.wiley.com/en-in/A+New+Companion+to+Digital+Humanities%2C+2nd+

Edition-p-9781118680599.

Shanmugapriya, T., et al. “An Introduction to the Functioning Process of Embedded Paratext

of Digital Literature: Technoeikon of Digital Poetry.” Digital Scholarship in the

Humanities, vol. 34, no. 3, Sept. 2019, pp. 646–60. Silverchair, doi:10.1093/llc/fqy064.

“Soham Deb.” Soham Deb, https://sohamdeb.wordpress.com/. Accessed 7 May 2021.

T, Shanmugapriya, and Nirmala Menon. “First and Second Waves of Indian Electronic

Literature.” Journal of Comparative Literature and Aesthetics, vol. 42, no. 4, 2019, pp.

63–71.

---. “Locating New Literary Practices in Indian Digital Spaces.” Matlit, vol. 6, Aug. 2018,

pp. 159–74. ResearchGate, doi:10.14195/2182-8830_6-1_11.

Roy 26

TINTA Poetry (@tinta.Poetry) • Instagram Photos and Videos.

https://www.instagram.com/tinta.poetry/. Accessed 7 May 2021.

