Distributed Memories: CompuServe’s Gamer’s Forum  
and the Halcyon Days of the Adventure Game Toolkit 

 

Judith Pintar 

 

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 

A few years ago, I took my children, then young teenagers, to the Strong Museum of Play in 
Rochester, New York, a wonderland of interactive exhibits and games. In one room, dozens 
of brightly lit and flashing Pinball Machines invited us to play our fill, but my son soon 
wandered away. I found him in an unflashy corner of the next room over, sitting in front of 
a boxy computer monitor, playing a late 1990s version of the largely text-based Oregon 
Trail. He sat at that computer far longer than the time he spent on anything else in the whole 
museum, which perplexed me. It is a game that he had many times played as a child, both at 
school and at home. The museum seemed to have triggered in him an experience of 
nostalgic immersion, as can happens when we read a book we associate with an earlier 
period in our lives. The emotions don’t necessarily arise from a sentimental attachment to 
the trigger itself (Oregon Trail was never his favorite game), so what was going on?  

Virtual worlds emerge from (and occur inside of) what gamers prosaically refer to as Real 
Life (RL). Affective attachments to virtual communities or game worlds are never fully 
disconnected from RL professional, personal, cultural, social, and sociotechnical experiences, 
pleasures, and anxieties. When my son re-entered the virtual world of Oregon Trail, it wasn’t 
just that fictional/digital world he was revisiting; he had also been connected with his past 
self, who he was in our family, in school, and in his own, younger, game-playing skin. Maybe 
he was recalling past mishaps and errors and trying to evade them with benefit of hindsight 
and his new, intellectually mature gamer’s vantage, but maybe he was just having fun and the 
rest was unconscious. Whatever the case, I’m glad I didn’t wreck his flow experience just 
because I was curious about his choice. 

In the research report following the multi-institution study, “Preserving Virtual Worlds,” 
Jerome McDonough and his colleagues at the University of Illinois, Maryland Institute of 
Technology, Rochester Institute of Technology and Stanford University, made the argument 
that what we must preserve when we set out to collect, archive, and curate games, is not just 
the software and the hardware necessary to play them, but the worlds that they create. They 
understand virtual game worlds to be simultaneously artifacts, commodities, and 
communities. As such, the problem of preservation necessitates attention to sociotechnical, 
legal, and relational issues simultaneously (McDonough 5.) As artifacts, for example, the 
issue of hardware and software obsolescence makes it difficult to ensure that collected games 
can continue to be played. As commodities, games constitute intellectual property protected 
by copyright law, though it can be difficult to determine ownership in order to acquire 
permission; the Digital Millennium Copyright Act prohibits attempts to circumvent the anti-
copying measures that games instituted in their original form, as well as the development of 
emulation technology (6). How does one preserve and curate a game that is one is not legally 
entitled to play? Legal and illegal emulations, as well as ROM hacking (editing) produce new 
game worlds which may be close copies, distortions, parodies or completely unique works 
that rest upon the framework of an old one. Some employ intellectual property in ways that 

fall into areas of fair use, but some don’t; which such versions of any game should be 
collected, preserved, and curated? Copying that can’t be done legally frequently proceeds 
illegally, and not all such activities will end up in court (57). Institutional archives have to 
step carefully when they enter the fray. 

Preserving the third aspect of virtual worlds, the community part, may appear less 
problematic. Generations of ethnographic work has demonstrated how relationally rich 
virtual worlds can be (see for example, Taylor 2006, Boellsdorff et all 2012,  Pellicone & Ahn 
2020). Loss is inevitable; game worlds do die –one of the sections in the Virtual Worlds 
report is called “Virtual Worlds that Died During the Grant.” Once a virtual world is gone, 
studies of its artifacts, commodities, and communities necessarily become forensic 
(Kirschenbaum 2008). Eschewing the crime scene metaphor, digital artifacts can be 
understood as objects turned up archeological sites; they need to be studied in relationship 
to the stratum in which they were found (see Huhtamo and Parikka 2019). Context is needed 
to understand what the lived experience of a lost world once was. I think about such tasks as 
restorative – first of provenance and then of meaning.  

I will soon be launching a restorative project related to the virtual world of the pre-internet 
era BBS, CompuServe (CIS). CIS Gamer’s Forum was a virtual community within that 
virtual world. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, writers and players of interactive fiction, 
text-based and other types of games, and to a lesser extent experimental and electronic 
literatures, all paid by the minute for the privilege of spending time together in CIS Gamer’s 
forum. CIS did little, if any, archiving of its forums in the period before 1997 when it was 
sold to America Online (AOL), its chief market rival, which was experienced as a bitter 
betrayal by some of its users. The user-generated digital content of the CIS forums during 
the BBS era, the collective memories of those communities, have been lost in time, like tears 
in rain, one might be tempted to say. But--not completely. 

In pre-internet dial-up era, users had to pay twice – first for the cost of the phone call, and 
then in a fee to the BBS service for time spent online. It cost a significant amount of money 
to “hang out” on CompuServe, and users found a variety of strategies to reduce the cost. 
Chief among these was the tactic of fetching online content and reading it offline. Software 
add-on product emerged to automate the retrieval of new mail and messages. This can be 
understood as a kind of sociotechnical drift. The most popular of such applications was 
“The Access Program for the CompuServe Information Service,” known as  TapCIS. 
Written in Borland’s Turbo Pascal by Howard Banner, TapCIS allowed CIS users not only 
to quickly download content, but also to peruse the indexes of forum libraries and the 
transcripts of private chats and public conferences offline. TapCIS was the user-experience 
tool of choice of CompuServe system operators (SysOps), both paid staff and volunteer 
moderators, who received “free flags” that allowed them to spend long periods of time 
online without cost. Surviving the takeover by AOL, TapCIS lingered, almost unbelievably 
long, as a beloved interface until 2004. Its farewell announcement is sweet and was clearly 
penned with tears: “We all knew, long ago, when the online world started moving away from 
proprietary systems to the web, that our TapCIS days were numbered. Nobody then ever 
could have dreamed that we would have lasted even as long as we have. It's been a 
wonderful, wacky, marvelous run and we have loved every minute of it.”1 

The use of apps like TapCIS and other time-saving strategies users employed to defy the 
fiduciary realities of virtual worlds-as-commodity provided a serendipitous benefit. They 
inadvertently produced a distributed archive of digital artifacts. They are significantly 
endangered, stored in thousands of wet basements, in boxes of sorted and unsorted floppy 
disks or, somewhat more securely but just as obscurely, on the backup tapes and CDs upon 
which the contents of floppy disks were copied. If such digital artifacts can be found and 
collected, they could restore much of the digital architecture of CIS Gamer’s Forum.  

The failure of CompuServe to archive its content was not only sad for its users, but it was 
also self-defeating in a historical sense. In his blog dedicated to the pre-internet era, The 
Digital Antiquarian, Jimmy Maher, points out that CompuServe remains largely unrecognized 
as the influence it was in the development of the Internet: “In histories of these things the 
focus always goes to the early ARPANET, the invention of TCP/IP, etc. Which is important 
— incredibly important — but a huge part of contemporary online culture can’t actually be 
traced back to the ARPANET and early Internet. It was CompuServe that invented and/or 
popularized real-time chat, e-commerce, online travel reservations, online newspapers, 
online encyclopedias, much of online gaming, etc., etc. Few people seem to remember 
that.”2 

My goal in restoring CIS Gamer’s Forum is not to restore CIS to its rightful place in history 
(I’m still mad about the AOL thing); I’m interested in preserving the digital artifacts of the 
post-Infocom, pre-Inform 7 era of interactive faction, the period in which The Adventure 
Game Toolkit (AGT) was at center stage. Written in Pascal by David Malmberg, AGT was 
inspired by, and a significant revision and extension of, the Generic Adventure Game 
System (GAGS), created by Mark J. Welch in the mid 1980s. I wrote my first interactive 
fiction in GAGS, which was installed on a used computer that I bought in Boulder, 
Colorado in the late 1980s, a PC’s Unlimited 386 XT (which chugged along at a blisteringly 
fast 6 MHz, its “turbo-mode which could be turned off at need).” I used GAGS so 
continuously that honesty compelled me to register it. I sent off the suggested fee to Welch 
and received back a letter from Malmberg, with disks of AGT software, documentation, and 
games. I was blown away by what I could create using these new tools.  

During the early 1990s as I worked was a children’s theater director and artist-in-residence in 
various Santa Cruz, California public schools, staging students’ original plays, and teaching 
them to write text adventures using AGT. The development system requires no coding, so it 
was a wonderful tool to teach the kids to write interactive stories. AGT does not require any 
coding per se, though it teaches logical, procedural, and ontological thinking. Designers 
create three text files which the AGT compiler processes into a game or other type of 
interactive story. The first, a .DAT file, contains a long list of rooms, objects, and creatures 
(including humans), indexed with a number. The location of an object at start of play, for 
example, will reference the number of a particular room. Attributes of these game items (like 
what room is to the north, or whether an object is edible) are also recorded in this file. The 
second, a .MSG file, is a long list of texts, also indexed with a number, including everything 
that might be printed to the screen in response to player action or error. The 
correspondence between the .DAT entries and the .MSG entries was always easy for the 
students to grasp. The description of an object contained in the .DAT file is referenced by 
the number of the appropriate text in the .MSG file. They are essentially two linked 

databases. More challenging for kids was the .CMD file, in which the initial values of all 
variables used in the game (both number and boolean variables) are set, and additional verbs 
(the commands that the player can use during play) are defined. The rest of the .CMD file is 
given over to what Malmberg called “meta-commands.” These define what will happen, 
depending on what a player types under a variety of conditions (what room the player is in, 
what the player is carrying, the value of certain variables in various combinations, whether an 
item is edible and so on).  
 
The system is simple and intuitive, and no programming experience or perceived aptitude or 
cultural capital or computer savvy was necessary to make interactive stories using AGT for 
my young students. Likely for this reason, in part, during the late eighties and early nineties it 
was the system of choice for non-programmers wanting to create parser-based interactive 
stories. Welch held an interactive fiction competition in 1986, for games written in GAGS. 
After his acquisition and revision of GAGS, Malmberg re-launched the competition in 1989, 
as an AGT competition. One of my games, CosmoServe: An Adventure Game for the BBS-
Enslaved, won the 1991 AGT contest. It was both a parody and a simulation of CIS. The 
work’s player character is a hapless programmer named A.J. Wright (whose program written 
in “Turborf” Pascal, (a software product created by “Orfland,” a nod to Borland’s Turbo 
Pascal) is not compiling. This is a problem since delivery is expected the next day.  
 
The scenes that take place in the R.J. Wright’s house read and play like traditional text 
adventures. The player has to GO SOUTH, OPEN FRIDGE, PUT TV DINNER IN 
MICROWAVE and so on. But once the player turns on the computer, the screen is taken 
over by what looks like a DOS environment and only DOS commands are recognized by the 
game. There are a couple of programs that (appear to) run from DOS, including a Pascal 
compiler that crashes and throws an error message, a word processing program loosely 
based on WordStar, and a working draft of a GAGS game being developed by the player 
character, a game inside the game. The player will need to evade such distractions, however, 
and log on to a simulated CompuServe BBS, called CosmoServe, via a DOS dial-up 
program, in order to really get started with the game.  
 
Once the player logs on, CosmoServe looks much as CIS did in the early 1990s, with 
forums, libraries, message boards, live conferences. The player must download a patch for 
the misbehaving Pascal to finish their program. This won’t be so easy, since every download 
contains a virus, and the Orfland rep will deny that the problem is on their end. Meanwhile 
the player’s attention wanders due to rumors of a ghost in the machine. The majority of the 
game is played by doing the ordinary tasks of the old CompuServe virtual world –attempting 
to download files from forum libraries without transmission errors, being spammed by 
strangers, resisting invitations for “hot” chat and trying not to run up too high of a credit 
card bill trying to your programming job done.  
 
The illusion that players logged into CosmoServe were somehow actually online was often 
reported to me. I used the computer speaker to simulate the classic modem noise, and I 
incorporated the familiar system beeps. Sometimes people who registered the game would 
tell me that when a virus attacked their simulated computer and they ran CHKDSK in the 
simulated DOS environment and it reported file corruption, they felt heart-pounding fear 
that my game had destroyed their actual computer. Player distress was never my intent, but I 
am pleased, in retrospect. CosmoServe is a simulacrum, a kind of preservation, that allows its 

players to glimpse a world that is gone. I’m not referring only to the online experience of 
CIS, but the RL world of dial up modems, money worries over spending too much time 
online, and the fear of downloading viruses, as well as the silly and stereotypical, but not 
completely inaccurate experiences of pizza-eating, sleep-deprived programmers during the 
era when DOS was boss and Borland ruled the programming world. I certainly never 
anticipated what would thirty years on be the hardest puzzle in the game – how to change a 
directory at a DOS prompt. 
 
Maher has noted, regarding AGT and other early games in the post-Infocom world, that 
have been derided as “hobbyist” games, that “to a much greater degree than the games of 
Infocom and other commercial publishers, AGT games feel like particularly personal 
expressions of their creators. In later years, jokes and no small amount of scoffing would be 
attached to Everyone’s First Game, which inevitably begins in said person’s bedroom and 
proceeds to play out in an environment interesting and meaningful to absolutely no one 
beyond the author’s friends and family. Yet the same tendency that spawns that 
phenomenon constitutes, I think, an important part of the text adventure’s ongoing 
fascination.”3 The fact that the first impulse of someone being given the ability to create an 
interactive narrative is to simulate their own lives is intriguing to me. It is true that every 
semester a hefty percentage of my students, upon being given the power to create any 
narrative world they can think of, do painstaking recreate their path from their own bed to 
their bathroom.  
 
I don’t think that’s what’s going on in the early AGT games, however.. Consider two 
winners of the AGT contest. A Dudley Dilemma, which told a story about a PhD student at 
Harvard was written by Lane Barrow, when he was a PhD student at Harvard. Son of 
Stagefright, a story set in a community theater, was written by Mike McCauley who was well 
acquainted with that small culture. Rather than being a sign of the narrative weakness of 
early games, Maher sees something else in those autobiographic-esque works: “When we 
look back today to the AGT games of decades ago, they take on an additional layer of 
interest as historical documents in their own right of the times and places that spawned 
them.”4 
 
I agree with Maher that what is valuable about these early AGT games (and the half-written 
beginnings of games that early AGT users also have buried in their basements) that I will 
invite them to unearth, is that many of these early games recorded the RL context in which they 
were writing. CosmoServe was intentionally not game-like in many ways because I was trying 
to point out that CIS users “played it” like a game. Just as A Dudley Dilemma allows players to 
experience Harvard in the late eighties and early nineties, and Son of Stagefright lets players 
glimpse community theater in that era, CosmoServe allows players to experience what it felt 
like to dial up and spend time in CIS, within a decent degree of accuracy, given the technical 
limits of AGT.  

A certain amount of trolling of AGT happened, much of it coming from partisans of its 
competitors, centered on the limitations of the system, which was not meant to be a 
programming language. When CosmoServe came out, a rumor went ‘round that I had 
hacked AGT to accomplish it. It is true that I tweaked the Pascal source code and 
recompiled it, but most of what I did was to accommodate the size of my games, which were 

Infocom length. I penned a defense of AGT that ran in XYZZY, the interactive fiction rag 
of the day, in which I attributed the perceived limitations to developer laziness. I largely 
stand by that defense – which arises from my love of constrained art forms. Nobody hates 
on a haiku because they only have 17 syllables. When I teach interactive narrative design, 
constraint of various kinds is presented as an essential source of inspiration.   

The year after I wrote CosmoServe I organized the seven-person team of CIS Gamer’s 
Forum members who together wrote the AGT game, Shades of Gray: An Adventure in Black 
and White, (SOGGY) which won the 1992 AGT competition in a special co-authored 
category. It was a game about moral ambiguity, and I can’t say more without spoilers. I 
mention it here because both of my games are surviving artifacts of the creative and 
generative virtual world of the CIS Gamer’s Forum. The SOGGY team was given a free flag 
to use when we were working on the game. This was an unprecedented privilege in the 
forum, a decision made by some higher CIS powers, which engendered some resentment, 
but which made the endeavor possible.   

In 1993 and 1994 I served as a judge for those last two years of the AGT competition, which 
by then had begun to accept games written in platforms other than AGT, like Text 
Adventure Development System (TADS) written by Michael J. Roberts, which had its own 
fiercely loyal community, and is still in active use today.  

In the mid-90s, Malmberg announced that he would no longer be maintaining AGT. 
Because it didn’t grow with the needs of its users, it was left behind by other tools which 
were responsive to the community. I don’t blame Malmberg for this. His company Softworks, 
which he created to support AGT was never a commercial success, and the work of 
supporting it was largely solo and thankless. For years I felt guilty that I didn’t take 
responsibility for AGT at that point, since I was more publicly associated with it than anyone 
but Malmberg. But the RL world was changing around AGT. In 1995 the charismatic CEO 
of Borland, Philippe Kahn resigned, and missteps in its choices shifted it out of the 
spotlight, and in 1997 CIS sold itself to AOL. The RL and virtual world gestalt that 
CosmoServe had simulated was gone.   

Of course CIS Gamers Forum was far from being the only interactive narrative community 
of the era. If my IF world was disappearing around me, others flowed together and 
coalesced around the Interactive Fiction Competition (IFCOMP). It began in 1995, picking 
up the torch as the AGT competition let it fall. This was the time that Inform 6, a language 
written by Graham Nelson, began its rise. In its current incarnation as Inform 7, is the most 
important development language in the parser-based interactive fiction world, and IFCOMP 
is the longest running interactive narrative design competition. The competition and the 
IFDB, an archive of interactive fiction created and maintained by TADS creator Michael 
Roberts, are both now supported by volunteers in the non-profit Interactive Fiction 
Technology Foundation (IFTF). 

I write IF and other interactive narratives in Inform 7 now, having learned it by translating 
CosmoServe into its natural language code. Through that process I came to understand that 
the narrative of the game exists separately from its coded instructions. It is neither/both an 
AGT game and an Inform game. But it remains tied to the history of AGT as a creative 

agent in the BBS era, to Borland before its fall, and to the RL world from which CIS 
Gamer’s Forum emerged.  

That virtual world does still breathe or at least appears to breathe through CosmoServe. But 
simulation is not really preservation. By calling for a gathering of the distributed memories of 
Gamer’s Forum (including, particularly, people’s unfinished AGT games) I hope to 
crowdsource the collecting of the digital artifacts of those entwined virtual worlds, now lost. 
I went hunting for my TapCIS files which I knew had to be in my cache of floppy disks (that 
I could somehow never bring myself throw away even after I no longer had a machine that 
could access them). Such is the liminal state in which CIS Gamer’s Forum and AGT artifacts 
everywhere exist. I discovered that I possess digital records holding the memories of my 
conversations with people who knew me on Gamer’s Forum as Teela Brown, the luckiest 
woman in the world. Heh. I don’t know most of their RL names either. I have found 
transcripts of private chats and public conferences, giving testimony to our experiences as 
readers and writers of interactive fiction, of gamers and game designers in that brief BBS era. 
Some of what I have found speaks to the gaming and game-writing lives of women in what 
was a conspicuously male-dominated game world. Treasures. I thought that CIS Gamer’s 
Forum was lost when CIS failed to preserve its digital history. It turns out that it 
miraculously survives, in bits of digital text, distributed and hidden across thousands of RL 
basements, including my own.  

 

References Cited 

McDonough, J.P., Olendorf, R., Kirschenbaum, M., Kraus, K., Reside, D., Donahue, R., 
Phelps, A., Egert, C., Lowood, H. and Rojo, S., Preserving virtual worlds final report, 2010. 
 
Boellstorf ,T.,Nardi, B.,Pearce, C.,& Taylor,T.L. Ethnography and virtual worlds: A handbook of 
method. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2012. 
 
Taylor, T.L. Play between Worlds: Exploring Online Game Culture. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2006. 
 
Kirschenbaum, Matthew. Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic Imagination Cambridge, MA 
and London, UK: MIT University Press, 2008. 
 
Huhtamo, Erkki, and Jussi Parikka, eds. Media archaeology: Approaches, applications, and 
implications. University of California Press, 2019. 
 

1 "TapcisForum - CS Farewell". tapcis.com. Archived from the original on July 8, 2019. 
Retrieved May 8th, 2020.  
2 Maher made this comment during a lengthy interview that he conducted with me regarding 
CosmoServe and the history of CIS Gamer’s Forum. It is recorded on his blog: 
https://www.filfre.net/tag/cosmoserve/. For Maher’s discussion of the significance of CIS, see 
https://www.filfre.net/2017/10/a-net-before-the-web-part-1-the-establishment-man-and-the-
magnificent-rogue/; For a discussion of AGT: https://www.filfre.net/2016/08/agt/; For a 

 

discussion of CosmoServe, see The Text Adventures of 1991: https://www.filfre.net/2017/12/the-
text-adventures-of-1991/; and for Shades of Gray (with spoilers): 
https://www.filfre.net/2018/09/shades-of-gray/ all accessed 5/8/2021.  
3https://www.filfre.net/tag/son-of-stagefright/, accessed 5/8/2021. 
 
4 Ibid. 

 

