Shepherd 1

Art of the Pan-Opt-in-a-Con: FarmVille and the Gamification of the Digital Landscape

On September 28, 2020, social game company Zynga announced that it would be

shutting down its most iconic product: the original, Facebook-and-Flash-based version of the

game FarmVille (“Important Announcement”). While the ceasing of support for Flash games on

Facebook is what ultimately led to Zynga “sunsetting” FarmVille, this explanation belies the

deeper resonances of a game that, at its peak, had 32 million daily active users (Victor). I argue

not only that FarmVille reset expectations for what digital experiences could be, but also that it

inaugurated a new status quo for digital products that was enabled by a kairotic coalescence of

beliefs and technological change. Understanding these preconditions, how FarmVille accessed

them, and to what degree FarmVille affected them may be helpful for imagining a

post-pandemic, post-FarmVille, and potentially even post-platform world.

[All roads lead to FarmVille]

Let’s begin with a brief history of FarmVille. Launched in 2009, FarmVille became the

first application to capitalize on Facebook’s news feed feature. At the same time, FarmVille

pioneered the use of big data, facilitating gameplay optimization and monetization in turn

(@markpinc et al.; Victor). FarmVille was also able to grow very rapidly in terms of capacity by

taking advantage of cloud services (Murphy), which have only become more accessible and

ubiquitous since then. Boosted by its freemium business model and bucolic setting, FarmVille

not only grew its user base astonishingly fast, it also did so by attracting an audience that had

previously not been interested in online games. Ludic luddites were drawn to the game’s simple

graphics and casual point-and-click game environment, which was advertised to them on a

platform where they were increasingly connecting with people they knew in real life. Most often,

Shepherd 2

it was through those very people that they were exposed to the game. This merger of the video

game world with the real world at this scale was unprecedented.

In addition to extending what a video game audience could look like, FarmVille

expanded the very concept of what a video game could be. Not only did FarmVille simulate in a

very basic way the labor of farming, it also relied on players for their actual labor vis a vis their

repeated engagement and attention. The reward system of the game required users to return daily

to tend to depictions of crops and livestock while encouraging them to complete branded offers,

pay for in-game benefits, and, of course, invite their friends to play the game, too. This

combination of embedded affiliate advertising, microtransactions, and referral marketing,

magnified by the ballooning scale of Facebook, made FarmVille a household name. And

although its success was short-lived, FarmVille’s model worked very well for long enough to

prompt Zynga’s public offering in 2011, and just this year Zynga’s CEO was among the top 20

highest paid (Gelles). FarmVille’s rise was also intimately tied to Facebook’s: In fact, when

Facebook filed its own IPO in 2012, it was revealed that 12% of the social network’s 2011

earnings—$445 million—came from Zynga’s products (Kain). The dominant social platform of

today was launched in part with the help of a game that was effectively its parasite.

[The Double-Edged Sword of FarmVillification; or, the Hotel Cowifornia]

The way FarmVille enticed users to sign away their privacy rights in order to play this

free-at-point-of-service game also made it a popular target of criticism. A 2015 paper on the

ethics of FarmVille’s use of big data describes a bait-and-switch dilemma: “When faced with

whether to acquiesce to Zynga’s Terms of Service including its privacy policy, users are given a

stark choice—either they acquiesce in total and give away access to the requested information

and any further information as to their in-game and across-platform activities or they don’t play

Shepherd 3

the game; the game many of their friends may be playing” (Willson and Leaver 151). FarmVille,

in other words, implemented and enforced a new set of normative behaviors that were lubricated

by low-stakes but nonetheless exploitative socialization.

Still others criticised FarmVille on aesthetic grounds. FarmVille seemed to imagine a

future for internet culture that was palatable only to the lowest common denominator, the

villeins, if you will. Complicating this critique, however, is the problem of defining what

FarmVille is. FarmVille epitomized the social game genre, despite the fact that it comprised very

few elements that could be considered social or gamelike in any traditional sense. Paying for

upgrades in FarmVille actually reduced the number of chore-like tasks a player needed to

accomplish on a daily basis. The implicit goal of paying into the game was seemingly to play the

game less, not more. Scholar and game designer Ian Bogost puts this contradiction succinctly:

“Social games are games you don’t have to play” (“Cow Clicker: The Making of Obsession”).

Bogost changed the conversation around FarmVille when he created his own satirical

version of the game called Cow Clicker, which he referred to as a “theory-cum-parody game.”

Cow Clicker reduced the already limited visuals of FarmVille to pictures of cows that a player

could click every six hours. This parody game also included simulacra of the marketing

components that defined FarmVille (ibid.). The purpose of Bogost’s game was to highlight the

nearly naked pecuniary function of FarmVille by creating a completely stark version. Both

games coerced players to pay money in order to temporarily relieve the low-level anxiety

perpetuated by the sisyphean task of needing to click things at regular intervals. And, perhaps

unsurprisingly, Cow Clicker developed a following to the tune of tens of thousands of users a

short time after being released, prompting Bogost to continue to develop the game far beyond

Shepherd 4

what he expected and leading him to eventually opine that: “Just like playing one, running a

game as a service is a prison one may never escape” (ibid.).

Games as services were not yet the norm in 2010 when Bogost wrote about his

then-ongoing experiences with Cow Clicker, but today it seems quaint to consider a time when a

developer could expect to ship a completed game, no matter how insignificant, and never have to

update it again. To put this another way, services offer ongoing, never entirely completed means

of extracting time, attention, and money from both customers and creators. Beyond games,

“everything-as-a-service” has been a common buzz word in enterprise technology circles for

years. “Platformization” explains this phenomenon, of companies creating their own

marketplaces that also serve as walled gardens for their products. This essentially describes the

motive behind anything that becomes a service, which is, increasingly, everything. In an article

describing digital platforms as means of expanding rentier capitalism, scholar Jathan Sadowski

describes platform capitalism in terms of data extraction, capital convergence, and digital

enclosure. Using the example of farming equipment, Sadowski points out that “after spending

$100,000 to buy a tractor, what you own is a big hunk of metal and rubber; you are only renting

the software needed to actually operate the vehicle” (Sadowski 573). It turns out, farming is an

ample metaphor for games as well as the broader contemporary economy of platformization.

As platforms have expanded, the term “social game” has moved even closer to

meaninglessness. Games resembling FarmVille and Cow Clicker have largely moved off of

social media platforms and onto mobile devices. Social media platforms and mobile game

developers do retain a symbiotic relationship through the social platforms’ APIs, which provide

authentication for user accounts and allow platforms to gather user data even when users are not

directly “on” the platforms themselves. However, the main difference today compared to 2009 is

Shepherd 5

that social platforms and physical media have simply receded from view. Today, all games are

social games just as all games are services. Of course, that doesn’t mean the prison Bogost

describes went away, it just got bigger, less visible, and less optional. In a platformed world,

everything is a service, and that means today’s games play you.

New technologies have arrived, disrupted (as Silicon Valley folks love to say), and

displaced old technologies—and ways of life—since long before the internet age. A newspaper

article from 1905 titled “Telephone Tyranny” weighing the “advantages and disadvantages of a

much-used instrument” feels eerily familiar. “A man’s house is no longer his castle if he has a

telephone—it disturbs one’s meals and demands an immediate answer” it reads (Sangster). And

with technological destabilization comes artist’s attempts to aestheticize it. In fact, the telephone

received this treatment by the likes of László Moholy-Nagy and others, prefiguring

contemporary new media art. Telephones, like games, required interaction. Bogost said himself

that games are art: “If literature is the aesthetic form of language, then games are the aesthetic

form of material constraints, of limitation” (“Play Anything”). Limits are indeed seductive. But

today, as Bogost’s own creation proved, games and their parodies are virtually indistinguishable.

A game’s constraints are themselves limited, reduced to the market logic of whichever platform

it is beholden to. Parody games are easily played with a straight face.

As digital experiences in general become homogenized by platform-as-a-service logic,

imagining other possibilities becomes challenging. As sociologist César Rendueles noted in his

2013 book Sociophobia, the traditional publishing industry’s consolidation and integration with

the “casino economy” provides an interesting case study. The effect of bowing to marketing

concerns limits not only what is published, but also how long it remains on store shelves (or in

virtual terms, in the gamified search results), and therefore what people consider to be literature

Shepherd 6

is altered (Rendueles 47). This is what happens to all digital products in a platformed context. In

this regard, Cow Clicker and FarmVille are indistinguishable because they conform to the

now-socially accepted logic of Facebook as a marketplace of attention.

[The Pan-Opt-in-a-Con: Variability is a Trap]

Bogost wasn’t the first to create a satirical point-and-click game in order to call attention

to the ways games are designed to inspire and profit from compulsive behavior. And examples of

the pre-platform era show that the road to our platformed world was laid far in advance of its

conquest. In the months before FarmVille launched and Facebook’s dominance was not assured,

game designer Edmund McMillen created a “joke” game-jam game called AVGM, which stands

for “abusive video game manipulation,” where a player would click a 2D image and new 2D

images would appear subsequently, even after hundreds of clicks. McMillen—who was featured

in the documentary Indie Game: The Film—made AVGM in response to what he saw at the time

as “a tactic that’s used in all MMORPGS [massively multiplayer online role playing games] . . .

to get people hooked on your game and pay for it” (McMillen). In simple terms, the tactic was to

trade digital goods for player’s time and money, resulting in digital commodity fetishism.

In the 2014 how-to book Hooked: How to Build Habit-Forming Products, author Nir

Eyal describes the tactic McMillen and Bogost are lampooning in terms of variable rewards. In

Eyal’s The Hook Model, “variable reward” is the third step in a four-step loop that consists of

“trigger,” “action,” “variable reward,” and “investment.” In a chapter focused on how to

implement variable rewards, Eyal puts video games in a category termed “rewards of the self,”

defined by the feeling of self-gratification they bestow. Curiously, this is also the category in

which he places email (Eyal 112-13). FarmVille is specifically cited later on in the same chapter,

in a section ominously titled “Beware of Finite Variability.” By 2014, FarmVille’s central conceit

Shepherd 7

was already played out, spread thin across numerous clone versions that Zynga had created in a

mad dash to further cash in on a cash cow that people paid to not play. And then even when they

did play FarmVille, as Eyal notes, it was “played mostly in solitude” (129). Echoing McMillen’s

2009-era concerns, Eyal contrasts the finite variability of FarmVille with the example of

MMORPG games like World of Warcraft, saying that they have “higher degrees of infinite

variability” due to the fact that “players themselves alter the gameplay” (129). Putting aside the

problem of explaining how there can be degrees of infinity, what Eyal is advocating is a world in

which experiences are bottomless and rely on user creativity as a key ingredient of a service’s

success.

Eyal concludes his cautionary tale of FarmVille’s finitude by reminding his acolytes that

“an element of mystery is an important component of continued user interest” (127). This

passing remark is reminiscent of Walter Benjamin’s more profound discussion of the ritually

derived aura of pre-industrial-era artwork in his 1935 essay “The Work of Art in the Age of

Mechanical Reproduction.” Specifically, Benjamin expected that the conditions of art’s

mechanical reproducibility would “neutralize a number of traditional concepts—such as

creativity and genius, eternal value and mystery.” Benjamin continues this thought by saying that

these properties, including mystery, are often “used in an uncontrolled way” and that, not only is

controlling them difficult, these properties “allow factual material to be manipulated in the

interests of fascism” (2). Of course, the auratic, mysterious nature of art has persisted through to

today, as has their weaponization. As Eyal’s advice demonstrates, control over mystery in the

form of variable rewards remains a goal of those who would seek personal gain by designing—

euphemistically speaking—habit-forming products.

Shepherd 8

Theodor Adorno’s concept of the culture industry picks up where Benjamin left off,

anticipating the phenomenons of FarmVille and Silicon Valley with uncanny accuracy. In the

1975 essay “Culture Industry Reconsidered,” Adorno describes the products of the culture

industry as top-down, mass-produced amalgamations of high and low art that result in the worst

qualities of both and uncritically pander to the status quo (12). Adorno chastens not only those

who would see the culture industry in terms of an “ordering factor...[i]n a supposedly chaotic

world,” but he also calls out “[t]he two-faced irony in the relationship of servile intellectuals to

the culture industry” as well as the complicity of consumers in their own self-deception (16). As

far as the diminution of the aura, Adorno posits that the culture industry “preserves the decaying

aura as a foggy mist” (15).

More recently, philosopher Bernard Stiegler echoed Benjamin in describing what he sees

as as the result of a “second machinic turn of sensibility” that is “made possible by digital

technologies”:

A work only works to the extent that one believes in it. More precisely, a work

only works to the extent that it affects us, in the sense that, suddenly, it jumps out

at us (elle fait saillance). Such a jumping out only affects us, and gets us hooked,

to the extent that it directs us toward a mystery: it reveals next to existence—next

to its own existence first and foremost, but also next to that of its author and of its

spectator—something other than the plane of existence—if one believes in it. The

experience of art is the experience of a work that opens up onto such a plane, and

that appears in this way to reveal this other plane. Every work of art has the

structure of a revelation. (“The Proletarianization of Sensibility” 9)

Shepherd 9

What is important to note here is that a pre-existing belief system is requisite for a work to have

a hooking effect. At least in this respect, Adorno’s prognosis of the culture industry’s products

agrees with Stiegler’s view of artworks in the digital age: as reflecting whilst manufacturing a

debased mentality en masse. Digital services increase the efficiency of manufacturing cultural

beliefs by making it possible for individuals to participate in their systematic reproduction. The

phenomenon of QAnon is one recent example of gamified belief, but Eyal ends his book with a

more traditional example: an extremely popular Bible app. Not only does Eyal hold this up as an

indication that his Hook Model is efficacious at reproducing a culturally accepted set of beliefs

underpinned by mystery, it also represents the extent to which digital services need not reinvent

but rather reproduce what we already buy into. Likewise, FarmVille was itself a clone of

moderately successful farming-themed predecessors that failed to as efficiently commoditize a

replaceable aesthetic (@markpinc et al.).

[The Tyranny of Completion: Games are Designed to Complete You.]

The amount of belief we have in the proprietary mysteries of black-box platforms is not

universally faith-inducing, but it is enough to sustain them. At some point, all games managed to

tap into undercurrents of platform culture, to the extent that games are functionally synonymous

with the experience of everyday life. Media scholar McKenzie Wark described in her 2007 book

Gamer Theory that: “Games are no longer a pastime, outside or alongside of life. They are now

the very form of life, and death, and time itself.” And in a 2012 article, cultural critic Jonathan

Beller builds on Wark’s conception of the digitized world, saying that “we are forced to wager

being itself in order to subsist amidst the practical-material deconstruction of life” (21). It

follows that the predominant metagame of the digital era is perpetual kairotic appeals to a

pre-existing sociopolitical worldview, undergirded by platforms, and in fact this is a key

Shepherd 10

component of what makes FarmVille a palatable, even tranquil, experience for some, while

arousing suspicion and even ire in others.

Not only are we all implicated in a gamified existence, Wark argues that “[t]he game has

colonized its rivals within the cultural realm, from the spectacle of cinema to the simulations of

television” (7). In his recent book Experimental Games: Critique, Play, and Design in the Age of

Gamification, media scholar Patrick Jagoda argues in more concrete historical terms that

“[n]eoliberalism borrows its key animating metaphors from games” (52) while explaining that

gamification is a cultural development that “operates as a formal and cultural counterpart to

neoliberalism” (9). Beyond the fact that games and neoliberal policies rose to significance

concurrently in the 1970s, Jagoda says that video games inculcate the subjectivity necessary for

neoliberalism to saturate everyday life (53). This of course echoes Benjamin’s observation that

the control of creativity, genius, eternal value, and mystery enables the distortion or

subjectivization of reality, as well as Adorno’s assessment of cultural industry products as “a

means of fettering consciousness” (18-19).

Jagoda describes how this plays out across different types of contemporary games,

including the genres of simulation games and the successors to social games, mobile games.

Mobile games, also often referred to as casual games, are for Jagoda a reflection of the

precariousness of widespread casual labor: they provide “a resting spot, an outlet, a habit, a

closed habitat, a temporary home for the energies of unemployment and underemployment”

(247). In describing a parody of a casual mobile game called Little Inferno, Jagoda also

illustrates that the spirit of FarmVille is alive and well in the mobile game era; like the earlier

described parodies, the game “converts the pleasures [of gameplay] into anxiety or, more

profoundly, in its parody reveals the anxiety that is always already inherent in the pleasures of

Shepherd 11

gamification” (ibid.). The tension between habit and habitat describes how games like FarmVille

insidiously blur work, play, and inveigles players of a specific sense of existence.

In addition to being a casual game, FarmVille is also a simulation game. Simulation

games often make no attempt to hide their conformity with neoliberal values. However, Jagoda

chooses the independently developed farming game Stardew Valley to illustrate how even subtle,

aesthetically rich, and explicitly non-social simulations imply a specific set of ideological,

societal assumptions. Even though Stardew Valley begins with the player character escaping an

office full of cubicles for the countryside, “everything in the [game] world promotes instrumental

actions and tight self-management” (70). As evidenced by the mechanics of Stardew Valley, the

neoliberal solution to the anxiety of spare time that is featured in casual mobile games is sold in

terms of entrepreneurial self-management in simulation games. FarmVille, combining both of

these genres, not to mention sharing a theme with Stardew Valley, figures as a faux pharmakon, a

pastoral placebo mediated by a screen, that to see through is to see a reflection of yourself in the

real and digital worlds simultaneously. And yet the result is neither here nor there; something is

lost in this additive process that distorts rather than reifies lived experience.

References to metaphors of surveillance, simulation, and self-regulation abound in

today’s art and literature. But prior models only go so far in anticipating our current moment. As

media and material culture theorist Petra Löffler observed in an interview with media theorist

Geert Lovink in 2013, “Today, it is no more that the few see the many (panopticon) or the many

see the few (popular stars)—today, because of the multiplication and connectivity of screens in

public and private spaces, the many see the many.” The global pandemic has only served to

further decrease the difference between our personal and work lives. At the same time, it also

revealed the costs of our obsessions with work and the precarity of our essential

Shepherd 12

interdependence. Platforms have become our life rafts; their owners seek to enclose and fulfill

every niche of our existence, resulting in a distillation of the psyche to data points in a vast sea of

networked server farms.

[Digital Platforms: Pharmakon or Farm-a-Con?]

Not only was 2009 the year FarmVille launched, it was also the year GeoCities bought

the farm in the U.S. In ushering in the platform era, FarmVille suburbanized—homogenized and

commodified—digital space. As artist and theorist Olia Lialina recently recounted in an essay

titled “From My to Me”: “Webmasters of the 1990s built homes, worlds and universes. But also,

outside of intergalactic ambitions, they strongly pushed the concept of something being mine.”

Oliana argues for the universal need for our own space. To quote a pre-internet architectural

hypertext work on this very issue, “People cannot be genuinely comfortable and healthy in a

house which is not theirs” (Christopher, Ishikawa, and Silverstein 393). This is the fundamental

problem of FarmVille and all platformed services: We are all tenant data farmers.

And herein lies the rub: The tessellation of platforms reduces us to pawns in their

owners’ gamesmanship. When a platform is put out to pasture, so are the users (a.k.a people)

who invested not only money but valuable time building them up. Flash is a case in point: while

it used to be simple enough to pirate Adobe products, user’s software skills have always been

held captive by Adobe’s and other tech giants’ support for Flash and its products—even before

the advent of Creative Cloud. Outside of profitability, Flash had no future. While Stiegler

expressed hopefulness circa 2010 that the digital, like writing, had the potential to be a

pharmakon, by way of deprofessionalizing powerful tools and putting them in the hands of the

many (“The Age of De-proletarianisation”), Oliana identifies a bleaker state of affairs today,

seeing a need for quitting walled-garden platforms cold turkey. Boycotts of digital tools are

Shepherd 13

complicated by the network effect. At least for writers, the tools and skills are separable. But as

long as the very digital homes and the tools we use to build them are rented, so are our digital

lives. The dichotomy between Oliana and Stiegler represents a conflict over what it means to

seek liberation in the digital age, presenting a choice between attempting to create our own

fiefdoms within platforms—the way streamers, digital artists, content creators, and so-called

indie game developers do—or abstaining from the platforms altogether.

Between these two extremes, though, there are countless other options that have been

imagined. Stacktivism for the more technically minded is one route that has been recently

advanced by Lovink (“Principles of Stacktivism”). The blockchain and non-fungible tokens

comprise another recent hot topic promising digital artists redemption but which has so far only

delivered more of the same in terms of environmental and economic problems. From another

more FarmVille-adjacent, economic perspective, a kind of digital Georgism, i.e. creating a digital

land use tax, has been imagined as a way to rein in monopolists (Smith). Along the same lines, a

non-intrusive, decommodified, non-platformed version of FarmVille is a natural place to begin to

think about a more equitable digital world. FarmVille ultimately did coax a broad swath of

people into online gaming despite its other more deleterious impacts. Would a FarmVille similar

to the GeoCities dream be possible now that the original FarmVille has ploughed ahead and gone

to seed? Augmented reality technology has already been used to create at least one functional

garden simulator (Okayama), so I would like to think so. Finding a way to extend education and

care, including and perhaps especially by digital means, has been underscored as an urgent need

in the Covid-19 era, and the global scale of this realization provides a glimmer of hope that we

not only have the imaginations but also the mandate and the wherewithal to cultivate a more

open digital landscape.

Shepherd 14

Works Cited

Adorno, Theodor W., and Anson G. Rabinbach. “Culture Industry Reconsidered.” New German

Critique, no. 6, 1975, pp. 12–19. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/487650.

Alexander, Christopher, Sara Ishikawa, and Murray Silverstein. A Pattern Language: Towns,

Buildings, Construction. New York: Oxford University Press, 1977. Print.

Beller, Jonathan. “Wagers Within the Image: Rise of Visuality, Transformation of Labour,

Aesthetic Regimes.” Culture Machine, vol. 13, 2012.

Benjamin, Walter, and Hannah Arendt. “The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical

Reproduction.” Illuminations / Walter Benjamin ; Edited and with an Introduction by

Hannah Arendt ; Preface by Leon Wieseltier ; Translated by Harry Zohn. Schocken

Books, 2007.

Bogost, Ian. “Cow Clicker: The Making of Obsession.” 21 July 2010,

http://bogost.com/writing/blog/cow_clicker_1/.

Bogost, Ian and Max Temkin. “Play Anything.” Chicago Humanities Festival, Chicago, IL,

December 5, 2016, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DRx8X8nMlo0.

Eyal, Nir. Hooked: How to Build Habit-Forming Products. United States, Penguin Publishing

Group, 2014.

Gelles, David. “C.E.O. Pay Remains Stratospheric, Even at Companies Battered by Pandemic.”

The New York Times, April 24, 2021,

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/24/business/ceos-pandemic-compensation.html.

“Important Announcement.” Zynga Support, 28 Sept. 2020. 25 Jan. 2021

[https://zyngasupport.helpshift.com/a/farmville/?s=announcements&f=important-announ

cement&l=en]. Internet Archive.

Shepherd 15

[https://web.archive.org/web/20210101012858if_/https://zyngasupport.helpshift.com/a/fa

rmville/?s=announcements&f=important-announcement&l=en].

Jagoda, Patrick. Experimental Games: Critique, Play, and Design in the Age of Gamification.

United States, University of Chicago Press, 2020.

Kain, Erik. “Betting on FarmVille - Facebook IPO Reveals How the Social Media Giant Makes

Money.” Forbes, 1 Feb. 2012,

http://www.forbes.com/sites/erikkain/2012/02/01/betting-on-farmville-facebook-ipo-reve

als-how-the-social-media-giant-makes-money/.

Lialina, Oliana. “From My to Me.” Interface Critique, 2021.

https://interfacecritique.net/book/olia-lialina-from-my-to-me.

Löffler, Petra and Geert Lovink. “The aesthetics of dispersed attention: An interview with

German media theorist Petra Löffler.” NECSUS. European Journal of Media Studies, vol.

2, no. 2, 2013, pp. 545–555.

https://necsus-ejms.org/the-aesthetics-of-dispersed-attention-an-interview-with-german-m

edia-theorist-petra-loffler/.

Lovink, Geert. “Principles of Stacktivism.” tripleC: Communication, Capitalism & Critique, vol

18, no. 2, 2020.

@markpinc (Mark Pincus) et al. “Tomorrow, Zynga shuts down FarmVille on Facebook after 11

years. . . .” Twitter, 31 Dec. 2020,

https://twitter.com/markpinc/status/1344742333443493889.

McMillen, Edmund. “AVGM (retrospective).” 20 Feb. 2009,

http://edmundmcmillen.blogspot.com/2009/02/avgm-retrospective.html.

Shepherd 16

Murphy, David. “There and Back Again: Zynga’s Tale With Amazon's Cloud.” PCMag, 10 May

2015,

https://www.pcmag.com/news/there-and-back-again-zyngas-tale-with-amazons-cloud.

Okayama, Tsuyoshi. “Future Gardening System: Smart Garden.” Journal of Developments in

Sustainable Agriculture, vol. 9, no. 1, 2014, pp. 47-50.

Rendueles, César. Sociophobia: Political Change in the Digital Utopia. Translated by Heather

Cleary, Columbia University Press, 2013.

Sadowski, Jathan. “The Internet of Landlords: Digital Platforms and New Mechanisms of

Rentier Capitalism.” Antipode: A Radical Journal of Geography, vol. 52, no. 2, 2020, pp.

562-580, https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/anti.12595.

Sangster, Margaret E. “Telephone Tyranny: Advantages and Disadvantages of a Much-Used

Instrument.” The Progressive Age [Scottsboro, Alabama], 24 August 1905,

https://www.newspapers.com/clip/43406580/the-progressive-age/.

Smith, Noah. “How to Tax Tech Monopolies.” Bloomberg, 21 October, 2019,

https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2019-10-21/how-to-tax-facebook-google-an

d-other-tech-monopolies.

Stiegler, Bernard. “The Age of De-proletarianisation: Art and Teaching in Post-Consumerist

Culture.” ArtFutures: Current Issues in Higher Arts Education, ELIA, 2010, pp. 10–19.

Stiegler, Bernard. “The Proletarianization of Sensibility.” boundary 2, vol. 44, no. 1, 2017, pp.

5-18.

Victor, Daniel. “FarmVille Once Took Over Facebook. Now Everything Is FarmVille.” The New

York Times, 31 Dec. 2020,

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/31/technology/farmville-zynga-facebook.html.

Wark, McKenzie. Gamer Theory. Harvard University Press, 2007.

Willson, Michele A. and Tama Leaver. “Zynga’s FarmVille, social games, and the ethics of big

data mining.” Communication Research and Practice, vol. 1, 2015, pp. 147 - 158.

Shepherd 17

