Graduate Student, Comparative Studies in Literature and Culture 

Lyr Colin 

University of Southern California 

 

Hugging Pixels 

How Gaming Rethinks Physical Interactions  

With a year of COVID-19-induced confinement, everyone’s lives have drastically changed. 

They were obviously marked by loss, mourning, and pain, carried by the spread of the infectious 

disease. Beyond that, they were heavily affected in their most basic organization and articulation, 

in  an  unprecedented  way.  Pre-COVID,  activities  could  easily  be  divided  between  “inside”  and 

“outside”: while that distinction could take different forms depending on each person’s situation, 

it seems nonetheless important to see that both work and leisure organized themselves around this 

understanding of space as a binary. The space in which we have been confining ourselves could 

also be understood in terms of a different binary. Instead of an inside/outside dichotomy, it is now 

defined as online/offline. That is to say, activities are determined by the capacity that we have to 

complete them over the Internet or not (e.g., remote work, classes, thanksgiving dinners, ordering 

groceries, dates, etc.). This new binary thus forces us to consider our environment in terms of the 

“real” confined space we live in, with the sense of isolation attached to it, as opposed to the “virtual” 

of a new form of social life during a pandemic. In enacting this spatial shift, many have thus needed 

to adapt to a new life online, one that is more deeply anchored in the virtual than it used to be. In 

that sense, I observed with some amusement my Facebook friends complaining about a life where 

all leisure and social interaction had to be done online. Amusement because, as a gamer, that is 

my life, and it has been for a long time before COVID.  

In this paper, I want to look more closely at the ways in which social interactions occur 

online,  specifically  in  a  gaming  space.  I  am  more  precisely  interested  in  the  ways  in  which 

physicality is enacted in a virtual gaming space. In order to examine those issues, I choose to start 

with a general discussion on physicality in itself and how it can be discussed in relation to media 

which are not meant to convey it (i.e., audiovisual). I will complete my argument with two different 

cases:  one  is  a  discussion  of  Massively  Multiplayer  Online  Role-Playing  Games  (MMORPGs) 

interactions, more specifically Final Fantasy XIV, which I approach both through the lens of my 

own personal experience playing it, and through a discussion of the show Dad of Light, as it makes 

use of the game itself in both its narrative and in its cinematography. This part of my paper will 

center  around  the  possible  embodiment  of  an  avatar,  and  the  ways  in  which  said  avatar 

communicates  “physicality”  back  and  forth  with  the  player  of  an  MMORPG.  My  second  case 

revolves around Virtual Reality (VR) and how physicality in that scenario compares my discussion 

around MMORPGs. 

Sensorial Oxymorons 

In titling my paper, I chose to go with a seemingly impossible action: hugging pixels. Pixels, 

after all, are merely constitutive elements of a digital image, they are intangible: how could they 

possibly be touched, or hugged? In order to understand the oxymoron here, I want to first define 

the “virtual,” borrowing the definition from William R. Sherman and Allan Craig: 

“A virtual world is the content of a given medium. It may solely exist in the mind 
of its originator or be broadcast in such a way that it can be shared with others. A 
virtual world can exist without being displayed in a virtual reality system (i.e., an 
integrated collection of hardware, software, and content assembled for producing 
virtual reality experiences) – much like play or film scripts exist independently of 
specific  instances  of  their  performance.  Such  scripts  do  in  fact  describe  virtual 
worlds.” (Sherman & Craig, 6) 

 

We can thus argue that a virtual world, or a virtual object, is an idea which is conveyed to 

us through mediation. As we cannot experience it in the raw of its originator’s mind, we have to 

rely on other elements (such as scripts) in order to approach them. Starting from this concept of 

the virtual as a mediated idea, our mind is easily drawn to the most current forms of mediation: 

writings, drawings, movies, music, etc. In other words, media that rely heavily, if not exclusively, 

on two of our senses: sight and hearing. From that understanding, it becomes clearer that touch is 

often left aside when it comes to conveying the virtual. 

We, as consumers of narrative media, typically have to engage with the diegesis through 

our sight and hearing. Yet our experience of audiovisual media is never exclusively tied to those 

two senses, as is argued by Laura Marks in The Skin of the Film: 

“Especially at a public movie theater, sensory information of all sorts abounds. We 
are aware of the movement and warmth of the other people in the theater, as well 
as  their  whispered  or  shouted  comments  on  the  activity  on  screen  or  elsewhere. 
Smells of popcorn and all sorts of other food, perfume, cigarette smoke (in the old 
days), body odor, cleaning products, or mildew from musty theater seats: any of 
these may address the sense of smell so insistently that it is hard to pay attention to 
the  audiovisual  image  on  screen.  […]  In  short,  the  cinema  viewing  experience, 
taken as a whole, is already multisensory.” (Marks, 211-2) 

As Marks argues, the experience of going  to the  movie theater (typically  considered an 

audiovisual experience) is never only about sight and hearing, and it includes other senses, such 

as the smells described here, but also the tactile feeling of the theater’s seat, or even the taste of 

popcorn could be argued to be a part of the audiovisual experience itself. All of these perceptions, 

however  non-diegetic,  participate  in  the  movie-viewing  experience  and  create  an  appropriate 

sensorial atmosphere. Marks’s consideration of media thus goes beyond the object we typically 

consider (the movie itself) and englobes the environment and rituals of media consumption as part 

of the experience.  Taking from  Marks,  we  can thus argue that  even in  a massively audiovisual 

mediatic  environment,  there  can  never  be  an  experience  that  is  deprived  of  other  sensorial 

experiences. In that sense, “touching” the virtual becomes less about a sense of touch that has to 

do with a diegetic element, but rather one that is tied to the experience of spectatorship as a whole.  

In this perception of the act of the viewing, the spectator is completely passive: they are a 

sponge  that  soaks  up  their  sensorial  environment,  without  necessarily  engaging  back  with  the 

media (here, film) in front of them. In that regard, Linda Williams offers a different point of view 

in her essay “Film Bodies: Gender, Genre, and Excess,” in which the viewer is not just acted upon, 

but also reacts to the movie they are watching: 

“In the body genres I am isolating here, however, it seems to be the case that the 
success  of  these  genres  is  often  measured  by  the  degree  to  which  the  audience 
sensation mimics what is seen on the screen. Whether this mimicry is exact, e.g., 
whether the spectator at the porn film actually orgasms, whether the spectator at the 
horror  film  actually  shudders  in  fear,  whether  the  spectator  of  the  melodrama 
actually dissolves in tears, the success of these genres seems a self-evident matter 
of measuring bodily response.” (Williams, 4-5) 

Here we see that the viewer takes a more active role, as they do not simply perceive their 

environment, but act back at the medium in terms of a mimicry of what they perceive on screen. 

Their own bodies are thus influenced by the medium, and the success of said mediatic object is 

even determined by the strength of the bodily reaction it provokes. While my reading of Marks 

proposed a distinction between senses interacting with the diegesis and senses interacting with the 

environment  of  the  mediatic  experience  (and  therefore  independent  of  the  mediatic  object), 

Williams  lets  us  think  of  an  experience  that  is  mimetic,  almost  synesthetic:  even  when  simply 

watching  and/or  listening,  other  senses  can  be  actively  solicited  by  the  mediatic  object.  It  thus 

becomes more possible to consider an interaction with the virtual object, even if only conveyed 

through audiovisual forms, that also engages with the sense of touch.  

Hugging Pixels 

The specific, typically audiovisual medium that interests me in this paper is that of (online) 

video games. A number of games do offer elements beyond the audiovisual: the simple vibration 

of a controller upon a hit or in a tense cutscene is, in fact, a solicitation of the sense of touch. Yet, 

the medium itself is broadly perceived as audiovisual, and as offering little haptic (i.e., tied to the 

sense  of  touch)  interaction.  What  interests  me  here  is  less  the  examples  in  which  there  is  a 

conscious attempt at a haptic gaming experience, and more the ways in which given games already 

achieve a sense of bodily presence, despite it not being their main design. 

From  my  personal  experience,  online  gaming  has  always  offered  a  richness  of  social 

interactions which I did not have in my immediate, physical surrounding. This manifested in the 

way  of  making  friends  from  Denmark,  Portugal,  Mexico,  or  the  United  States  all  the  way  to 

Singapore, while remaining in my Parisian apartment. Those interactions themselves are assuredly 

the reason why I can speak English to such an extent today, and why I was able to transition to a 

life in the United States without feeling too violently uprooted. My online friendships nonetheless 

puzzled  people  around  me,  who  wondered  how  friendship  without  any  physical  interaction  (or 

perspective thereof) could possibly work. If anything, my friends were perceived as pen pals, even 

though to me it felt like there was a physical component to hanging out with them on a near-daily 

basis. Part of the reason why is because, in a sense, we were physically together: not with our own 

bodies of flesh and blood, but rather, embodied by our game avatars. 

In the specific context of MMORPGs, game avatars are usually personalized and made the 

player’s own. By this process, the player can create their own character, as opposed to embodying 

a pre-made protagonist (e.g., Geralt of Rivia in the Witcher series). I would argue that customizing 

an avatar carries importance in the perception and articulation of the self, as it allows to deconstruct 

an idea of a singular “ego” centered around our physical body and to replace it with a society of 

the self, as articulated by Sherry Turkle in her article “Cyberspace and Identity”: 

"To  use  analyst  Philip  Bromberg's  language  (1994),  online  life  has  helped  Case 
learn  how  to  "stand  in  the  spaces  between  selves  and  still  feel  one,  to  see  the 
multiplicity  and  still  feel  a  unity."  To  use  computer  scientist  Marvin  Minsky's 
(1987) phrase, Case feels at ease cycling through his "society of mind," a notion of 
identity as distributed and heterogeneous. Identity, from the Latin idem, has been 
used  habitually  to  refer  to  the  sameness  between  two  qualities.  On  the  Internet, 
however, one can be many, and one usually is." (Turkle, 645) 

The avatar as a fragment of the self, then, is not simply a handy device, but becomes an 

interface, a medium, in the same way that our own physical body acts as a medium between “us” 

and the real world. The avatar is effectively our body inside a given virtual environment. Thus, the 

process of character creation (and naming) can sometimes be confusing to someone who is not 

used to the idea of creating such an interface.  

The show Dad of Light  on Netflix  is  based on a real  story, detailed in  a  Japanese blog, 

about  the  “Dad  of  Light  Project”  in  which  a  gamer  introduced  his  60-year-old  father  to  the 

MMORPG  Final  Fantasy  XIV  while  concealing  his  identity  online.  It  highlights  important 

moments  of  the  discovery  of  online  gaming  spaces,  starting  with  that  of  character  creation,  in 

which the son helps his father to build a character. The choice of an online name, highlighted as 

comedic in the show, is also an element of the real story, recounted as follows: 

「名前はどうする？実際の名前はあかんで？」  しばらく考える父・・・。 

しばらくのち・・ぼそりと・・・  「じゃあ・・・・いのうえ。」  え？

誰？？ 

いやいや・・・世界を救う光の戦士の名前よ！？そんな近所にいそうな名

前でいいの？？  井上さん？ (Blog: “光のお父さん。”) 

“What about your name? You can’t really use your real name.” Dad thinks for a 
second… and another… and whispers… “Hm, then… Inoue.” Huh? Who is that? 

No no no… is that the name of a Warrior of Light who saves the world?! Is it really 
okay to have such a pedestrian name?? Mr. Inoue? (Translation mine) 

 

The avatar, from its very creation, is problematized in terms of its need to be differentiated 

from reality. It cannot be “likely to be found in the neighborhood” (the literal translation of 近所

にいそう) and needs to be demarcated from any sense of reality. The need for a special name also 

highlights the fact that the father, by attempting to name himself “Inoue” (a rather common name 

in  Japan), had failed to  embrace his  entrance into a fantasy.  The definition  of fantasy  given by 

Laplanche and Pontalis is helpful in understanding the issue in his choice of name: 

“Imaginary scene in which the subject is a protagonist, representing the fulfilment 
of a wish (in the last analysis, an unconscious wish) in a manner that is distorted to 
a greater or lesser extent by defensive processes.” (Laplanche & Pontalis, 314) 

By adopting a pedestrian name, the father had utterly failed in embodying a protagonist. In 

the words of his son, “is that the name of a Warrior of Light who saves the world?!” Here it seems 

thus essential to the integrity of the Dad of Light Project that the father truly engages in the fantasy 

of the game, as it will become the only way for a relationship to develop in the virtual space.  If 

the father fails to pour himself into his avatar and to achieve a sense of identification to the body 

on screen, it then jeopardizes the project through which his son will be able to reach out through 

the use of this virtual space. In that sense, the in-game avatars become vessels through which a 

relationship can express itself in ways that seem impossible to achieve in reality. That is not to say, 

of course, that father and son (in the case of the real story) had a bad relationship to begin with. 

Rather, the online interaction is envisioned as a way to develop something more, something that 

is not only inexistent but seemingly unachievable in the real world. 

As we see a scene of the father confronting a Treant Sapling (a high-level monster in the 

starting  zone,  programmed  to  stay  passive  unless  provoked),  the  son  immediately  fears  for  his 

father’s  “death”  and  comes  to  his  rescue.  As  a  response,  and  not  knowing  how  to  use  the  chat 

function of the game, the father instinctively does something that many players recognize: he runs 

around the other player, before leaving. In a later scene, which is a repeat of the same encounter, 

the  father  will  instead  use  the  emote  function,  and  have  his  character  kneel,  thus  prompting 

nostalgic memories of the real-life father kneeling in front of his son when he was a child. These 

elements show what I want to call a “disembodied physicality.” That is to say, a physicality that is 

enacted without a tangible body, but through the means of a virtual avatar. Although there is no 

direct physical interaction (touching) between the father and son’s avatars, there is nonetheless a 

physical element to their communication, as the father uses his avatar’s body to communicate his 

gratitude and emotions in a form of limited sign language. 

This sense of disembodied physicality is precisely the feeling I described in the context of 

my  own  online  gaming  experience:  there  is  a  specific  quality  to  avatar  interaction  that  simply 

cannot be found in text or vocal chat. It is quite frequent when talking in-game to end up meeting 

“physically” (i.e., with each player’s avatar) with an interlocutor, only to have one’s avatar run 

around aimlessly while having a discussion. There is no purpose to those actions in terms of the 

game itself. However, they serve a stronger sense of physical presence, beyond that of a bodily 

sensation, for the people involved. 

Hugging the Air 

I have so far mentioned games that have, if any, a very limited sense of haptic interaction: 

MMORPGs,  with  the  prevailing  example  of  Final  Fantasy  XIV,  are  games  that  are  mostly 

audiovisual, and not meant to stimulate any haptic sense in the player. They were thus useful in 

exploring  Linda  Williams’s  idea  of  a  media  that elicits,  in  an  almost  synesthetic  way,  physical 

sensations without them being actually enacted upon the body. In this part of my paper, I want to 

turn to Virtual Reality (VR) games as a different system, specifically in how they are designed to 

engage more senses (and specifically touch) than regular games. 

In  their  discussion  of  VR,  Sherman  &  Craig  highlight  different  ways  in  which  one  can 

attempt to motivate the sense of touch through a gaming device. Such devices can make use of a 

player’s  joints  (i.e.,  making  them  move  their  arms,  legs,  fingers,  head,  etc.);  apply  a  specific 

temperature, texture, or even electrical current at given moments; limit movement in relation to 

either the body or to an object; provide the player with an object of a specific shape that matches 

the diegetic item being held (e.g. the guitar-shaped controller to play Guitar Hero), etc. (Sherman 

& Craig, 181-184) In other words, VR has many tools at its disposal to engage our haptic sense in 

more than a mimetic or synesthetic way: an electrical current or a given texture or temperature will 

provoke  a  physical  discomfort,  where  Linda  Williams’s  examples  resulted  from  a  process  of 

identification or mimesis to the situation witnessed on screen. In Virtual Reality, embodiment is 

therefore fairly different from that observed in an MMORPG: where a game like Final Fantasy 

XIV requires the player to disregard their physical body and project themselves onto an avatar as 

their vessel, the VR system allows the player to directly use their own body and to transfer it to 

some capacity into the diegesis of the game itself. It is therefore not a disembodied physicality, as 

the body of flesh and blood is at the center of the gaming experience.  

I want to bring up my own experience on a popular VR application, VR Chat. In that game, 

I have mostly interacted with a friend whom, although I have yet to meet physically, I am very 

close to. We have interacted through instant text message, voice-only chat, video chat, MMORPGs, 

and VR. As I mentioned earlier, there was already a qualitative difference between our interaction 

with and without avatars, in terms of a feeling of closeness and “disembodied physicality” that we 

could share within the context of an MMORPG (or other cooperative games with avatars). This 

came to such an extent that, upon first using video chat, I already felt familiar with my friend’s 

body language and facial expressions, despite having only seen them in very few pictures before. 

When using VR, the way in which we interacted was further changed: in MMORPGs there was a 

sense of wanting our avatars to be close to one another even though there was no such need to be 

able to communicate. We simply wanted to “see ourselves,” in our avatar embodiment, replicate a 

natural  situation  of  discussion  while  standing  next  to  one  another,  or  at  least  being  in  relative 

physical proximity. This was often accompanied by the use of emotes or other game elements to 

express ourselves (for instance, using a “hug” emote). VR, and specifically VR Chat, introduced a 

different perspective on those interactions. In VR Chat, the proximity of avatars is a requirement 

for communication, to the point that two players standing at opposite sides of a huge virtual room 

would not hear themselves well. The game thus forces a sense of physical closeness and inertia 

that is close to what we experience in a real-life conversation. Furthermore, the use of emotes had 

to be supplanted by our actual gestures. At times, this means reaching out to one another, or even 

awkwardly hugging the air, glitching through each other’s avatar. The reason why I mention this 

experience is to bring up the fact that despite the apparent awkwardness of “pretending” to hug, to 

high-five, or to poke one another, we nonetheless did it, and it brought a physical element to our 

interactions, regardless of any actual haptic stimulus. 

I want to think of this experience as one close to synesthesia: the visual impression that we 

are hugging provoked a feeling satisfying enough that we were willing to engage in miming an 

actual  act  of  physical  interaction.  Yet,  it  seems  quite  different  from  more  typically  synesthetic 

experiences, such as associating a musical note with a color, despite not actually “seeing” anything. 

Here, there is an actual physical engagement, in the form of two halves of one hug, each enacted 

physically by each player. The association of senses is thus not purely mental but rooted in the 

willingness  of  the  player  to  engage  in  a  one-sided  act  of  physical  interaction,  which  is  only 

reciprocated in terms of a visual stimulus.  

For this sentiment, I would propose a neologism, “phantesthesia.” That is to say, a ghost 

(phantasma)  sensation  (aisthesis)  of  physical  interaction,  despite  the  fact  that  the  subject  is 

engaging into a physical act on their own. Hugging the air, or reaching out towards something that 

one can see but not feel, becomes akin to attempting to embrace an illusion or a specter: it is there 

for one sense, yet not for the other, but we choose to engage with it with all our senses nonetheless. 

Using the concepts of disembodied physicality and phantesthesia side-by-side, I hope to 

obtain a better understanding of how physicality can be articulated in virtual spaces, depending on 

the means at hand. This consideration would lead me to consider the extent to which as players, 

we engage ourselves with the game’s diegesis, and end up becoming a part of the virtual world 

itself.   

 

 

Works Cited 

❖  Gaylor, Graham, and Jesse Joudrey. VR Chat. Video Game, Massively multiplayer online 

VR game. VRChat Inc., 2014. 

❖  Laplanche, Jean, and J.-B. Pontalis. The Language of Psycho-Analysis. New York: 

Norton, 1974. 

❖  Marks, Laura U. The Skin of the Film: Intercultural Cinema, Embodiment, and the 

Senses. Durham: Duke University Press, 2000. 

❖  Sherman, William R., and Alan B. Craig. Understanding Virtual Reality: Interface, 

Application, and Design. Morgan Kaufmann Series in Computer Graphics and Geometric 
Modeling. Amsterdam ; Boston: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2003. 

❖  Turkle, Sherry. “Cyberspace and Identity.” Contemporary Sociology 28, no. 6 

(November 1999): 643–48. 

❖  Williams, Linda. “Film Bodies: Gender, Genre, and Excess.” Film Quarterly 44, no. 4 

(Summer 1991): 2–13. 

❖  Yamamoto, Kiyofumi. “Dad of Light.” Netflix, 2017. 
❖  Yoshida, Naoki. Final Fantasy XIV. Video Game, MMORPG. Square Enix, 2013. 
❖  マイディー. “光のお父さん。.” 一撃碓殺SS 日記 (blog), August 6, 2014. 

http://sumimarudan.blog7.fc2.com/blog-entry-1950.html. 

