Digital Narrative and Temporality 

 

Serge Bouchardon and Erika Fülöp 

 

Introduction 

We sometimes hear it said that our relationship with time has been altered. In companies and 
administrations,  the  adoption  of  New  Management  strategies  means  that  employees  feel 
themselves subjected to ever increasing urgency and stress. The “FOMO Syndrome,” the anxiety 
generated  by  our  fear  of  missing  out  on  something  in  a  world  in  which  we  are  exposed  to  a 
constant flow of information and access to other people’s narratives (or at least to their stories), 
is a phenomenon inherently linked to the digital environment. The Covid-19 crisis has no doubt 
accentuated this tendency, with its injunction to stay increasingly connected (particularly to social 
media and video conferencing platforms), and to immediately respond to digital notifications and 
sollicitations on a 24/7 basis. 

According  to  Paul  Ricoeur,  “narrative  attains  its  full  meaning  when  it  becomes  a  condition  of 
temporal  existence”1  (Ricoeur,  1984).  From  this  perspective,  narrative  is  our  principal  tool  for 
situating ourselves in time  ― and for experiencing time within ourselves. Moreover, the Digital 
may be characterized as “a tool for the phenomenal deconstruction of temporality” (Bachimont 
2010). This  is reflected  in  its  two  main  tendencies:  that  of  real time calculation,  conveying  the 
impression  of  immediacy,  and  that  of  universality  of  access,  conveying  the  impression  of 
availability. The digital, thanks to its availability and its immediacy, thus leads to a constant state 
of presence, without any trace of the passage of time (Bachimont, 2014). 

What happens then when the digital and narrative come together, when digital technology and 
narrative discourse, between which obvious tension exists, are combined? What happens when 
we exploit the particularities of “programmable media,” to use the term coined by John Cayley 
(2018),  which  for  Bruno  Bachimont  are  essentially  detemporalizing,  to  tell  a  story,  which  we 
traditionally  consider  as  being  structured  by  an  internal  temporality  and  linked  to  an  external 
temporality? From such a perspective, the term digital narrative would appear almost oxymoronic.  

Digital narratives do nevertheless exist and are proliferating in multiple forms and thanks to varied 
approaches. What kind of temporal  experiences  are  constructed  by  these  new forms  of  digital 
narrative, and how are they constructed? Reciprocally, what new narrative forms, or even new 
concepts of narrative do these new temporal experiences provided by digital technology offer to 

                                                
1  “Time  becomes  human  to  the  extent  that  it  is  articulated  through  a  narrative  mode,  and  narrative  attains  its  full 
meaning when it becomes a condition of temporal existence.” (Ricoeur, 1985). 
«  Le  temps  devient  temps  humain  dans  la  mesure  où  il  est  articulé  de  manière  narrative  ;  en  retour  le  récit  est 
significatif dans la mesure où il dessine les traits de l’expérience temporelle. »  
 

 

1 

us? The challenges lie in the manner in which narratives, revisited for and by digital tools and the 
digital environment can on one hand stand up to the deconstruction of time provoked by the said 
tools and environment, and on the other hand make us reflect on our relationship with time, and 
on  the  place  of  narrative  as  a  discursive  mode  in  our  culture  and  our  ways  of  interpreting  the 
world. 

In this article we will focus on three very different types of digital stories, in order to analyse the 
diverging potentialities of the relationship between the digital, temporality, and narrative. We will 
study two artistic creations on the one hand, and the widely used social media feature of stories 
on the other.  

We  will  first  examine  a  fictional  work  written  for  the  smartphone2  (downloadable  from  an  app 
store),  which  is  based  on  notifications,  i.e.  in  which  a  fictional  character  regularly  sends 
notifications to the user. This type of narrative plays on notions of temporality, with the intrusion 
of the reader’s real time.  

We will also study a narrative based on a real time data flow3. The constraints imposed on the 
narrative  by  this  type  of  apparatus  imply  that  the  causality  of  events  is  replaced  by  the 
sequentiality of real events. Yet this technical specificity, the linking of the narrative to a real time 
data flow, can mean that life’s contingencies enter into the narrative and result in a  “pure time 
experience” (Chambefort, 2020).  

Finally, with a change of field and direction, we will examine the phenomenon of the stories made 
possible notably by platforms such as Instagram and Facebook, which allow users to display a 
short video clip, an animated or static picture, a text or even a mini-survey for a default duration 
of  twenty-four  hours,  which  in  turn  is  temporalized  and  presented  to  users  with  an  associated 
duration of fifteen seconds, after which the feature automatically displays the next story available 
in the user’s newsfeed.  

These three examples each explore the notion of temporality and the use of time in the digital 
“narrative” from  a  different  angle: first, the  interaction  between  the  real time  of  the reader  and 
his/her reading with narrative time, and so with the fictional work, then that of the diegetic time 
determined by the data flow, which thus becomes the temporal axis of the work in question, and 
finally  the  temporality  imposed  by  the  story  features  on  various  platforms,  presented  as  a 
constitutive aspect of the story, and which the content provided by the user adopts and integrates. 

The Digital, Time, and Narrative 

If  the  digital  medium  is  principally  a  medium  for  detemporalization,  as  established  by  Bruno 
Bachimont (Bachimont 2010), it nonetheless makes if possible to perform time. It enables time to 
be acted out, or to play a role in a fictional work thanks to the interactive dimension it offers to the 
user. If we are to compare the different ways of staging time depending on the medium, we could 
claim that the audiovisual media, which are time-based media, are by definition very prescriptive 
― the length of a film coincides with the viewer’s stream of consciousness (Stiegler, 1998), even 

                                                
2 Enterre-moi, mon amour (Bury me, my love), The Pixel Hunt and ARTE France, 2017:   
https://enterremoimonamour.arte.tv/. 
3 Lucette, gare de Clichy, Françoise Chambefort, 2017: http://fchambef.fr/lucette/. 

 

2 

if  media  for  individual  use  allow  for  interruptions,  rewinding,  fast  forwarding  or  acceleration, 
modifying  the  original  temporality  inscribed  in  a fictional  work.  The  printed text  is  inversely  not 
very prescriptive (the reader acts out his/her own reading time, between interruptions and cursive 
reading. The digital, in its capacity as a metamedium (Manovich 2001), is capable of reproducing 
the characteristics of all previous types of media without their materiality, and can act both ways. 
It  can  also  offer  other  dimensions  thanks  to  its  inherent  interactivity,  and  the  fact  that  it  is 
connected  to  a  network  and  external  resources  allows  it  to  draw  on  and  manipulate  their 
temporality. A digital narrative can also stage the user’s time on a local level, as well as delegating 
to  them,  or  to  a  third  party  who  is  also  a  member  of  the  network,  the  instigation,  or  even  the 
execution of temporal actions.  

Roberto  Simanowski (2011)  considers  that from the  temporal  point  of  view,  the  relationship  of 
digital  literature  to  digitized  literature  is  analogous  to  that  of  the  film  to  photography.  This 
comparison would seem to hold only partially, in that digital narratives play on the whole range of 
possibilities, from the initiation of the process (as when viewing a film) to control by the reader 
(when reading a book) of the temporality of reading or viewing. 

An important notion should be emphasized here, that of performance. Jerome Fletcher proposes 
that performance, considered in its relation to performativity, should be taken in its broadest sense 
in  the field  of  digital  literature. Thus  performance  could  articulate  various  dimensions  of  digital 
texts: 

While continuing the investigation of live performance, we will be seeking to broaden the 
scope  to  include:  interactivity;  the  performative  gesture  of  the  hand  and  fingers  (digital 
text)  on  the  interface;  the  performativity  of  language  itself  on  the  screen;  social 
performance, or how digital texts “perform” us; the performance of codes and scripting; 
and the performance of the machine itself, i.e., what does an engineer mean when s/he 
talks about performance?4. 

What  is  particularly  interesting  here  in  the  notion  of  performance  is  the  idea  that  a  process  is 
underway, that is to say we are dealing with an event rather than with an object. This is what Ian 
Bogost refers to as “procedural representation”.  

[procedural  representation]  explains  processes  with  other  processes.  Procedural 
representation is a form of symbolic expression that uses process rather than language. 
[…] Procedural representation itself requires inscription in a medium that actually enacts 
processes rather than merely describe them. […] 
Procedural  representation  is  significantly  different  from  textual,  visual,  and  plastic 
representation. Even though other inscription techniques may be partly or wholly driven 
by  a  desire  to  represent  human  or  material  processes,  only  procedural  systems  like 
computer software actually represent process with process. This is where the particular 
power of procedural authorship lies, in its native ability to depict processes. (Bogost 2007, 
9, 14) 

                                                
4 Fletcher, J., in his introductory paper for the seminar, “Digital Textuality with/in Performance,” May 2012 at the 
University of Falmouth (GB). 
 

 

3 

 
The digital narrative, insofar as it constitutes an event and process performed by the machine and 
by  the  reader,  may  (re-)introduce  temporality,  a  temporality  that  intertwines  the  activity  of  the 
computer  with  that  of  the  reader-player-user.  This  (inter)active  manner  of  living  a  temporal 
experience must be distinguished here from the experience of time constructed by all narratives, 
according to Ricoeur. We have on one hand the temporal experience brought into existence and 
formulated  through  narrative  by  its  very  essence,  according  to  its  traditional  classification  as 
discourse establishing a chronology and causality, and on the other hand the temporal experience 
performed  by  the  reader-user,  based  on  a  process  taking  place  on  a  timescale  with  a  varying 
degree of mani(pul)ability, within the frame and the limits imposed by the software. 

Although in digital narratives the writing/ reading medium has a tendency towards spatialization, 
the way in which the medium not only performs time, but also transforms its manifestations on 
the screen and the reading process into a performance, also tends towards temporalization, and 
offers  a  temporal  experience.  As  such,  this  type  of  production  can  also  be  interpreted  as  a 
questioning of temporality. To what extent do the most recent forms of digital narrative introduce 
and/or incarnate a new relationship with time?  

1. Narrative games for the smartphone: 
smartfictions built around notifications 

According to Bruno Bachimont, a narrative may be seen as a causal articulation of agents, within 
a  flow  of  events  conceived  as  what  happens,  what  happens  to  me,  what  happens  to  us 
(Bachimont,  2021).  The  incoherence  of  the  flow  is  reconstructed  in  a  coherent  manner  by  the 
narrative,  which  lends  causal  intelligibility  to  events.  Yet  the  digital  represents  an  increasingly 
overflowing stream, manifesting itself particularly in the form of notifications and injunctions. How 
do certain digital narratives stage this flow of what happens to us in order to render it coherent?   

On mobile application distribution platforms (Google Play and App Store) one can find more and 
more interactive narratives for smartphones, or smartfictions (Picard, 2021). These fictions rely 
on ordinary daily practices on a smartphone, realtime chats, for instance, but also notifications. 
What are the principles underlying these smartfictions built around notifications?  

Let’s  take  the  example  of  Bury  me,  my  Love  (Enterre-moi,  mon  amour)5.  This  narrative  game 
released in 2017 is the fruit of a collaboration between The Pixel Hunt studio (and particularly the 
game designer Florent Maurin) and the  Arte France  television channel. The inspiration for this 
creation was a witness account published by Le Monde in 2016, The Diary of a Migrant6. This 

                                                
5 http://enterremoimonamour.arte.tv/. 
In Arabic, “Bury me, my Love” means “Take good care of yourself,” “Whatever you do, don’t die before I do”.  
6 Le Journal d’une migrante (The Diary of a Migrant): 
https://www.lemonde.fr/international/visuel/2015/12/18/dans-le-telephone-d-une-migrante-
syrienne_4834834_3210.html 

  

 

4 

journal  of  a  young  Syrian  woman  migrating  to  Gemany  is  constituted  thanks  to  a  WhatsApp 
thread, and then transformed into the interactive fiction, Bury me, my Love7.  

Figure 1. The title screen for « Enterre-moi , mon amour » (in French). 

 

 

In this interactive fiction, the reader incarnates the character of Majd, husband of Nour, the young 
Syrian woman who is attempting to reach Europe. The reader exchanges messages with Nour 
via an instant messaging platform. The duration of the journey between Syria and Europe is not 
pre-determined. It can take anything between a few days and a few months.  

The interaction between the chronology and the temporality of events becomes entwined with the 
play  between  cartography  and  spatiality.  The  reader  can  follow  Nour’s  progression  via  a  GPS 
tracker in the top right corner of the instant messaging screen, and so can visualize the character’s 
progression in real time on a map. This temporality is also an indication of the reader’s progression 
through the narrative. The closer Nour gets to a European country, the closer the reader is to the 
end of his/her reading experience. The tracker is therefore  a spatial and temporal indication of 
both the character’s progression and that of the reader in his/her reading process. 

 
 

                                                
7 The interactive prologue may be acted out here in French: http://enterremoimonamour.arte.tv/prologue. 

 

5 

Figure 2. Map illustrating the character’s route. 

 

 

As  the  reader  travels  along  the  various  pathways  (there  are  19  different  possible  endings),  a 
digital counter indicates the number of days that have passed. The border may be temporarily 
closed, or Nour might have scheduled a meeting with someone who doesn’t turn up on time. In 
such cases, is it better to wait, or to reconsider your plans? 

Your communications will take place in pseudo real time  ―if Nour must accomplish an 
action which is supposed  to take her several hours, you will not be able to contact her 
during this time lapse. When she returns, a notification will inform you that she is again 
available ―and that she might need you 8. 

 

                                                
8 http://enterremoimonamour.arte.tv/. 

 

6 

Figure 3. Nour’s character is no longer available.  

The reader must wait until she sends him/her a notification. 

 

 

 

7 

It is the “real time” mode which is of interest to us here (see the screenshot below). It should be 
noted that the reader has the possibility to disable the mode of “real time” notifications, which is 
the default mode. 

Figure 4. Settings for the “real time” mode.  

 

 

The piece plays with temporality through the intrusion of the reader’s real time (which is then also 
that  of  the  fictional  character).  The  relationship  to  the  reading  time  is  thus  altered,  due  to  the 
intrusion  of  notifications:  when  the  user  receives  a  notification  from  Nour,  amongst  other 

 

8 

notifications, they are incited to dive back into the fictional work to dialogue with the character. 
From a phenomenological perspective, we can consider that there is an interruption caused by 
the  injunction  behind  the  notification.  Fictional  works  built  around  notifications9  can  disturb  the 
user’s time management considerably, but, at the same time, reintroduce their “real time” into the 
fictional framework. In the same way as locative narratives10 play on the frontier between fictional 
space and the reader’s real space, inciting him/her to physically move to a specified place to make 
the narrative progress, narratives built around notifications play on the frontier between fictonal 
time and the reader’s real time. 

What  is  the  added  value  brought  to  us  by  smartfictions  which  use  notifications  as  part  of  the 
narrative  process? They  create the  impression  of  a  co-presence.  As readers  of,  or  actors  in  a 
smartfiction, when we make a choice, our actions in a way render a fictional character present in 
our  own  reality.  Moreover,  this  notion  of  presence  is  further  reinforced  when  we  respond  to  a 
character’s sollicitation via a notification. In this way we invite the other’s temporality (as well as 
that of the fiction) to interact with our own. The temporality of the fictional character (and of events) 
coincides with the reader’s temporality via the notifications, so that they interiorize the duration of 
the story. It should be noted that for some readers, the fact that they must put aside the narrative 
to wait for a notification may be a factor contributing to disengagement from the narrative (in this 
case it is always possible to disable the notifications). 

Such interplay relies prominently on the fact that the smartphone is the device which we use daily 
for  our  communication  and  writing  purposes.  The  blurring  of  reality  and  fiction  is  particularly 
effective as the same device is used for daily communications and for reading / playing a fiction11. 
If this characteristic lends a reality effect to a fictional narrative, we also realize, due to the fiction’s 
notifications that have a blurring effect on our own reality, that the smartphone is itself in some 
ways a derealization medium: it builds a fictional layer which is external to the real world. Thanks 
to  such  fictional  works,  we  come  to  understand  that  the  smartphone  has  already  become  a 
medium for fiction (and for narration), bringing a new relationship with temporality – and no doubt 
also reminding us that the fiction vs. reality distinction is no longer quite so relevant here.    

2. Narratives built around real time data flows 

If the digital, as we have already pointed out, manifests itself through an increasing overflow of 
data, it nonetheless produces this data flow in accordance with a calculatory logic, whereby time 
is precisely no longer present as such (absence of horizons of expectation and anticipation), as 
we are dealing with results, and not occurrences (Bachimont, 2021). In the domain of the digital, 
calculation does away with notions of expectation and what is to come, replacing these by the 
calculatory consequences of the world understood as input data. Is it possible to re-establish a 
temporal experience, notably the power of expectation, based on these calculated results? 

                                                
9 Here we could quote Lifeline (2015) or Somewhere (2017). 
10 For example The Cartographer’s Confession (2017), by James Attlee, which is set in London. 
11 This blurring effect can be found in all the  Lost Phone  type smartfictions, (A Normal Lost Phone, Another Lost 
Phone, Ana the Game...), in which the user is supposed to have found a phone, the content of which (messages, photos, 
agenda…) he / she is able to flick through in order to understand the protagonist’s story. 

 

9 

In The Language of New Media (2001), Lev Manovich coins the term of  “database narratives”. 
Since  then,  we  have  been  able  to  measure  “the  growing  impact  of  databases  on  narrative 
strategies” (Baroni and Gunti, 2020, p. 42). With a whole range of narratives based on data now 
available, we have chosen to focus particularly on narratives based on real time data flows. 

To what extent can a fictional narrative be built around a real time data flow? The strongest limit 
imposed on a narrative by this type of medium is that the causality of events is replaced by the 
sequentiality  of  real  events  (Chambefort,  2020),  as  illustrated  in  our  example  below,  without 
narrative mediation. Yet according to certain definitions (Schmid, 2005, Revaz, 2009), the causal 
link between events is a sine qua non condition for narrativity, and may even be considered as its 
key constitutive feature. A simple sequence of events or data cannot therefore become a narrative 
without the intervention of a consciousness and ensuing representation creating a link between 
them. At the same time, the technical specificity embodied by reliance on a real time data flow 
injects life’s contingencies into the narrative (Chambefort, 2020). 

Let us consider one particular example,  Lucette, gare de Clichy, a web narrative by Françoise 
Chambefort built around a real time data base (2017, http://fchambef.fr/lucette/). 

Lucette  lives  just  opposite  the  Clichy-Levallois  station.  From  her  window,  she  can  see 
travellers passing by,  and coming to visit her, or not. The trains, with their strange and 
familiar  bynames,  are  like  characters  who  pay  visits  to  Lucette.  There  are  very  lively 
moments, and moments of great solitude. (Françoise Chambefort, the work’s paratext).   

 

Figure 5. Lucette, gare de Clichy, by Françoise Chambefort. 

 
 

 

 

10 

This creation is connected to real time through data from the Paris region rail network (the “L” line 
of the Transilien network). The interface is like a triptych. On the left, train times are displayed 
(trains may be late, or cancelled), in the middle is  a succession of photographs of Lucette, the 
fictional character, and on the right, we can access her stream of thoughts (which are more or 
less positive depending on how long she must wait for the next train.) 

The web reader’s attention oscillates between the real and fictional poles of the digital creation. If 
they feel empathy for the character, they will live an exceptional temporal experience. They will 
feel the vulnerability of an old person who has little control over her life (Chambefort, 2020). The 
calculated time dimension of the train timetables becomes existential time, a waiting period that 
becomes full of meaning. 

 

 

Figure 6. The interface in triptych form. 

 

The  fact  that  this  creation  is  not  interactive  reinforces  the  temporal  experience.  The  author 
emphasizes the non-interactivity of her creation, as if to offer greater incitation to the user to pay 
more  attention  to  old  people  suffering  from  loneliness  in  the  physical  world.  Although  Lucette, 
gare de Clichy is of course built around the calculated timescale of a real time data flow, it is at 
the  same  time  a  “pure  experience  of  time,”  based  on  the  temporal  experience  of  the  fictional 
character (Chambefort, 2020).  

 

11 

 

Figure 7. Transforming a data flow into a temporal experience. 

 

Françoise  Chambefort refers  to  her  creation  as a  “narrative”.  If  we  can evoke  a  narrative,  it  is 
mainly  thanks  to  the  words  spoken  by  Lucette,  her  thoughts,  and  the  unifying  force  of  her 
perspective (and of her life, which she tells us about within this framework). Yet this creation is no 
doubt situated at the frontier of what constitutes a narrative, as in the previous case. Indeed, Bury 
me, my Love, can be categorized as a “narrative game”. The present work raises the question as 
to how far we can stretch digital narratives before they cease to be narratives. 

Might the digital narratives based on real time data flows and adding signification to them be able 
to help us to more readily accept the flows of digital data to which we are subjected in our daily 
lives,  or  even  to  foster  a  different  relationship  with  these  flows  and  the  temporality  which 
accompanies them? 

 

 

 

12 

3. From storytelling to storyshowing: the stories 
on social networks 

Our  third  case  study  concerns  the  “story”  feature  available  on  Instagram  and  Facebook.  This 
feature  allows  users  to  display  content  for  a  limited,  twenty-four-hour  period,  after  which  it 
disappears12.  The  content  of  a  story13  can  take  on  all  the  forms  possible  for  other  types  of 
publication ― videos or photos, principally, with or without textual commentaries, or even just a 
text.  Additional  functions  are  proposed  to  enhance  these  media  with  static  or  animated  filters, 
layout options, or even interactive options such as surveys. Irrespective of whether the chosen 
medium is temporal / animated (video, gif) or static (photo, text), the length of the story remains 
limited  to  15  seconds,  and  photos  or  other  static  media  are  also  presented  for  viewing  for  a 
duration of 15 seconds, after which the algorithm automatically passes on to the following story 
in what we could refer to as the viewer’s “storyline” (they can also move on to the following story 
without  waiting  for  the  end  of  the  one  being  displayed).  It  is  possible  to  create  sequences  of 
photos, videos, texts, etc., but they will always be displayed as a collection of fragments rather 
than a unique continuous video sequence (click here to see a recording of a viewing screen).  

 

 

Figure 8. “Storyline” on a Facebook computer interface. 

 

                                                
12  The  programmed  disappearance  can  be  avoided  on 
story,(cf. 
https://help.instagram.com/1660923094227526/?helpref=hc_fnav&bc[0]=Instagram%20Help&bc[1]=Instagram%20
Features). Facebook conserves archives which are accessible only to the author of a publication. 
13 We will be using the italics here to distinguish the social media feature from the traditional meaning of 
“story”. 

Instagram  by  highlighting  a 

 

13 

The  interface  in  which  the  stories  are  inscribed  creates  a  sort  of  continuous  succession  of 
fragmented sequences, which, once activated, displays a non-stop chain of stories until the user 
interrupts it – unlike the newsfeed, which requires the user to repeat an interactive swiping gesture 
to make publications appear on the screen. Thus each story must not only be adapted to strong 
temporal  (and  therefore  formal)  constraints,  but  also  conform  to  inclusion  in  a  chain  of  stories 
created  by  algorithms,  with  the  inevitable  advertisements,  which  are  even  more  ineluctably 
imposed on users when viewing stories than on the newsfeed, even if one can swipe the screen 
to pass on to the following story, as well as to a condemnation to disappearance after a twenty-
four hour period14. 

In short, then, the characteristics of the story which are of interest to us are the following: 

1)  it bears the name of a discursive mode traditionally reserved for the representation of 

causally linked events and actions set in time; 

2)  yet it does not impose any criteria for narrativity in the traditional sense;  
3)  it  relies  indifferently  on  temporal  or  atemporal,  animated  or  static,  visual  or  textual 

media, with nevertheless a strong preference for the visual and the dynamic; 

4)  it is characterized by a double temporal constraint: a maximum length of a few seconds 
(internal temporality) and a default lifespan of twenty-four hours (external temporality); 
5)  it is accessed (viewing, reception) within a temporal framework defined by the platform, 

even when non-temporal media are concerned;  

6)  it is integrated on viewing in a rapid chain of stories emanating from the viewer’s entire 

network15. 

 

We shall confront the above points with the traditional acceptation and use of the term story (ie. 
narrative) in a discussion in two parts, taking the points in reverse order. 

6, 5 and 4: The story is separate from its author’s other publications, from what could constitute 
the context associated with that particular moment, fragment, or piece of information belonging to 
their  life.  Friends  who  are  sufficently  assiduous  in  following  the  author’s  publications  may  be 
capable of reconstructing a narrative, but such reconstruction is not aimed at, or facilitated by, the 
platforms  (Facebook  presents  stories  as  “a  visual  medium  which  is  ideal  for  sharing  authentic 
moments”16), and this can only be done by going agains the grain of the tool. If a user’s profile 
shows a collection of his or her publications in reversed chronological order making it possible, to 
some  extent,  and  with  great  difficulty,  as  such  is  not  the  aim,  to  go  back  in  time  and  perhaps 
reconstitute a narrative in the true sense of the term, even if it is a fragmented and incomplete 
one, and it does not follow the pattern of a narrative as we generally conceive one, stories are 
explicitly and deliberately destined to remain fragments which only the memory of their viewers 

                                                
14 On Facebook in particular, it is possible to override some of these limits, and to propose a slightly longer video, or 
to make a story visible for a bit longer, but these practices remain marginal. Here we will focus on the basic parameters 
and practices. 
15 N.B. This is also true for the newsfeed, but other types of publications remain on the author’s profile, this becoming 
part of a sort of journal. 
16 See the guidelines for companies:   
https://www.facebook.com/business/help/304846896685564?id=2331035843782460 (these are the points which we 
emphasize here). 

 

14 

can piece together.17 At the same time, the integration of these fragments in the chain of stories 
of a network of friends contributes to building a form of artificial continuity between the stories of 
various people (and with pages devoted to news or advertising). No causal link is established, but 
a more or less simultaneous panorama of moments in peoples’ lives with no connection between 
them (other than the “friendship” with the user in question) – “your friends (and the ads) right now” 
(today).18 The “narrative identity”19 of each person is of little real interest here. Not (primarily) that 
the “friends” don’t care, but because the platform only needs  to extract the data from publications 
that  allows  it  to  establish  a  consumer  profile  for  a  given  user,  a  profile  which  has  commercial 
value. The narrative identity – as yet not constru(ct)ed as such – of the individual thus gets lost in 
the  digital  identity  of  a  network,  which  is  both  a  continuous  flow  of  visual  information  and  a 
pixelated  image  constructed  through  a  simple  algorithmic  juxtaposition,  always  in  and  for  the 
present moment20.   
 
Paradoxically, then, given their name, stories separate themselves from the thread of a person’s 
life experience to become part of a snapshot of a social panorama which has no temporal axis 
and is destined to disappear. The individualism behind the self-representation and self-promotion 
which seem to motivate users to exploit the story function to share moments of their lives actually 
contributes in this way to a form of deindividuation which is realised through detemporalization – 
which  itself  passes  through  the  detour  of  a  minimal  temporalization  of  non-temporal  media  –  
whereby each person’s role is limited to enriching the network, in all senses of the term. Each 
individual and each story, to quote Pink Floyd, is “just another brick in the (others’ digital) wall.”  
 

                                                
17 We have already mentioned the option which consists in proposing a sequence of moments, however, as we have 
also seen, this does not prevent a fragmentation logic from prevailing. Facebook also proposes an archive for your 
own stories, but this is only available for the author’s own use. 
18 Examples of this can be found in literature. Thierry Crouzet’s novel, One Minute, initially published on Wattpad in 
2015, notably presents a sort of narrative panorama which recounts the same minute in time in 366 different places in 
the world. “The 366 episodes of this series, each designed to be read in little more than a minute, recount in turn the 
same minute from the point of view of new characters. The story does not advance in time, but in space. The intrigue 
develops little by little, from one place to the next, and from one time zone to another, and heroes emerge as they 
exchange  with  their  friends  or  enemies.”  This  literary  experience  which  reminds  us  of  postmodern  narrative 
deconstructions  nonetheless  proposes  a  coherence  between  all  the  minutes  of  the  different  characters.  (The  whole 
tradition of microfictions, as well as that of ‘mini-biographies,’ could of course be used as a basis for comparative 
analysis).  
19  Mayer  and  Bouchardon  (2020)  put  forward  the  hypothesis  of  a  “poetic  identity”  built  around  a  collection  of 
snapshots, moments and fugacious impressions which, reinforced by social media, would coexist alongside Ricoeur’s 
“narrative identity”  
20It is interesting to observe that the platforms and their users present this as an approach aimed at the pureness of the   
narrative, identitarian or visual construction of profiles (and/or commercial pages): “Instagram’s Story is a great way 
to share events as they happen without clogging up your carefully curated feed with dozens of throwaway images. 
Your friends and followers might be interested to see what’s going on in your life or get a behind-the-scenes view of 
what you’re working on, but they probably want to be able to opt-in rather than have it just appear in their feed. It’s 
part  of  Instagram’s  move  to  be  a  more  complete  social  network,  rather  than  just  a  place  for  pretty  pictures.” 
https://www.howtogeek.com/722354/what-are-stories-and-why-does-every-social-network-have-them/ 

 

15 

3, 2 and 1: According to statistics (without any indication of the source) given by a “community 
manager,” a practician and blogger who is a specialist on networks, and passionate about the 
subject, “51% of people want stories which are short and easy to understand.” 21 
This would explain the emphasis on the visual aspect and on the simplicity of the message, in 
both structure and content, thus banning any causal or argumentative construction which would 
require reflection taking longer than the 15 seconds dedicated to each story. Facebook’s official 
recommendations indeed insist on the importance of combining visual aspects with speed to best 
capture the viewer’s attention:  

 
Accelerate your rhythm to maintain the attention of your audience; the content of stories is 
viewed  much  more  rapidly  than  that  of  other  media.  We  suggest  you  create 
advertisements which capture the audience’s attention right from the first image, and 
that  you  conserve  their  attention  by  playing  on  the  speed  of  publication  and 
transmission.” 22 

 
The platforms offer a multitude of models and filters which allow these aims to be materialized, 
facilitating the task of the creators of stories, with the above recommendations in mind (cf. figure  
 

Figure 9. Instagram story templates.  

 

 

                                                
21https://www.mycmmag.com/storie-contenu-impactant-sur-les-reseaux-
sociaux/?fbclid=IwAR1ijwPw0Y5wJp9Ic765u2h1xayQOtnmcqsrPHalWqLOFOARWrve8YOWNpU#:~:text=7.  
We  could  also  emphasize  the  fact  that  according  to  these  statistics,  almost  half  of  users  do  not  indicate  any  such 
preference, from which we may deduce that they are open to the idea of longer, more complex  stories which would 
make users think. The trend towards the short and simple is a priori not necessarily a fatality, but is alimented by a 
circuit  of  supply  and  demand  that  encourages  this  preference  through  a  race  for  efficiency  in  (advertising) 
communication. A study commissioned by Snapchat also reveals the greater efficiency of advertisements of 6 seconds 
over those which last 15 seconds, thus confirming the preference among users for extreme brevity, even for temporal 
media. 
(https://forbusiness.snapchat.com/blog/does-every-second-really-count-a-closer-look-at-video-ad-insights). 
22 https://www.facebook.com/business/help/304846896685564?id=2331035843782460.  The emphasis is ours. 

  

 

16 

Micro-temporality, a preference for the “show, don’t tell” approach, and the accelerated rhythm 
inherent  to  stories  are  thus  greatly  motivated  by  their  communicational  goal  ―  promotion,  the 
famous  “15  minutes  seconds  of  fame,”  to  be  hammered  into  people’s  consciousness  by 
multiplying  the  stories,  as  the  experts  in  digital  marketing  suggest,  whether  for  personal  or 
commercial communication. Inciting engagement and active participation is said to have been the 
main goal when stories were first introduced on Snapchat in 2013.  
 
Whereas in the context of Instagram and Facebook, stories represent an acceleration in relation 
to  other  publications  which  remain  available  there  without  any  time  limit,  on  Snapchat  they 
introduced  a  deceleration  (!)  compared  to  the  immediate  disappearance  of  “standard”  snaps. 
Contrary  to  the  stories  prevalent  on  Instagram  and  Facebook,  those  on  Snapchat  consist  in 
piecing together a user’s “snaps” (a snap, according to Snapchat’s definition, is “a moment sent 
to a friend”), created in a 24-hour period by assembling them in a chain in which the oldest element 
disappears as soon as it has reached the end of its 24-hour lifespan, and to which new snaps can 
be added. In this manner a sort of fragmented narrative is constructed which resembles what is 
proposed by the newsfeeds on the other two networks without any time limits. The formula was 
thus substantially transformed on Instagram and Facebook, in spite of their – hardly unmeditated 
– adoption of the term story, even if it still remains possible to line up successive moments on 
these  networks.  This  adoption  precisely  marks  a  convergence  between  the  two  temporal  and 
memorial  approaches  of  the  three  networks,  initially  very  divergent,  with  the  shared  goal  of 
inducing addiction:    

Before  Stories,  Snapchat  was  a  task-based  social  network.  That  means  that  people 
would only open the app to take a specific action, like checking a notification or sending a 
message. Stories transformed it into an app that people wanted to passively check 
throughout the day.  

People post things all the time, so you feel compelled to open the apps and check for content 
multiple times a day. You don’t want to miss anything. Stories take that to another level. 
The temporary aspect of Stories drives people to use social networks even more.  the 
best engagement tools social media has ever seen. […] Stories are just the latest tool 
to build engagement and keep you in the app23. 

The narrative, taken in its traditional sense and according to classical and cognitive narratological 
theories24,  provokes  reactions  in  the  receiver  by  appealing  to  emotions  and  other  cognitive 
functions  by  presenting  human  experiences  and  making  it  possible  for  them  to  interpret  and 
integrate these in their life experience. This capacity of the narrative is directly linked to the fact 
that  it  establishes  temporal  and  causal  links.  However  here  we  witness  a  completely  different 

                                                
23  https://www.howtogeek.com/722354/what-are-stories-and-why-does-every-social-network-have-them/.  Another 
study also emphasizes the feature’s commercial aim, “It manages to build a more lasting narrative, which provides 
much better opportunities for brand use in terms of doing things like advertisements, offers and marketing campaigns, 
too.” (https://techcrunch.com/2013/10/03/snapchat-gets-its-own-timeline-with-snapchat-stories-24-hour-photo-video-tales/) 
24 See Ricoeur’s theory, already quoted here, as well as the works of Monika Fludernik (2009), David Herman (2013), 
Nancy Easterlin (2012) and Lisa Zunshine (2006), among others. 

 

17 

logic, aiming at a simple and immediate emotional response, and appealing to our senses (vision, 
hearing) and to our desire for entertainment and intense immediate pleasure.25 
 
Not only does the story thus fail to impose any criteria for narrativity, but narrativity also seems to 
be an obstacle to its immediate efficacy. According to the classical definition by Gérard Genette, 
a narrative is an “oral or written discourse which aims to relate an event or a series of events.”26 
Today this definition, limited to verbal communication, must of course be widened to include other 
means of communication, as the representation mode can also be purely visual or audiovisual. It 
can also be extended by eliminating the reference to events, in the manner of Richard Walsh, for 
whom a narrative is “the semiotic articulation of a temporal sequence.” 27  
This  is  about  as  far  as  minimalism  can  be  pushed  without  losing  the  specificity  of  narrative 
discourse. In order to construct a “temporal sequence”, a minimum of two moments are obviously 
necessary. Yet everything in the logic behind stories tends towards the equation “one story = one 
moment”  (one  product  /  one  message  /  one  joke  /  one  simple,  i.e.  non-composite  idea28)  and 
stories are independent from one another. 
 
Thus  the  story,  in  the  way  it  is  conceived  and  practised  on  social  networks,  does  not  rely  on 
narrative in its traditional sense,  while at the same time exploiting the  historical success of the 
concept and the associated practices (a success which must have inspired the choice of the term 
story). In English, the new, additional meaning of the word has found its place in the dictionary in 
competition  with  the  traditional  significations,  and  to  some  extent,  it  is  only  the  context  which 
allows us to distinguish between them. In French, and no doubt in other languages too, “story” 
remains  a  word  which  has  been  quite  recently  imported  or  borrowed,  and  which  has  been 
popularized  by  this  novel  phenomenon.  The  meanings  of  the  French  terms,  “histoire,”  (story) 
“récit” (narrative / tale), and “narration” could theoretically remain unaffected when we are dealing 
with  the  “story”.  However,  some  French  users  also  refer  to  stories  as  “histoires”29,  and  the 
meaning of the English term is indeed well known enough to allow the link to be established, and 
to  permit  retroaction  on  the  traditional  meaning  of  the  term  “histoire,”  which  may  thus  also  be 

                                                
25 See Tik Tok’s creed: “inspire creativity and bring joy”.As the latest network to date, and the most popular one with 
young people, Tik Tok merely accentuates a potentiality and aspect present in the other networks, at the expense of 
and/or without the ‘burden’of deeper communication and sociability, in the same way as advertisements, generally 
speaking  simply increase the  exploitation of  the  features offered due to their  ferocious competition to be the  most 
captivating, successful or profitable. Nevertheless, constructing a successful profile or campaign on Tik-Tok requires 
serious reflection as to the best possible use of the few seconds available to capture the attention of those surfing the 
data flow. However videos can also sometimes go viral without their having been elaborately prepared or promoted, 
if they capure a unique, original, entertaining moment, for example. 
26 Figures III, p. 71. 
27    Richard  Walsh  and  Susan  Stepney,  ‘Introduction  and  overview:  who,  what,  why’‘,  Narrating  Complexity, 
(Springer, 2016). 
 
28 We are of course referring to a global tendency, which does not excude the existence of stories which do not follow 
it. Facebook allows users to present a short series of photos presented one after the other, for example, which may 
constitute a mini-narrative composed of several different moments, or on Instagram the inclusion of several photos in 
one frame is possible, which is similar to presenting a temporal sequence, a bit like a page in a cartoon book.  
29 See for example https://www.a7la-home.com/fr/instagram-reels-vs-story-difference/.  

 

18 

colonized, at least partially,  by the spirit of stories30. Insurmountable barriers are unlikely to be 
erected  in  other  languages  to  block  the  extension  of  the  meaning  of  “story”.  The  only 
interrogations concern the extent to which the associated practices will become generalized, and 
to what extent users, particularly the new generations, will prefer these and allow them to take 
the place of what will still consider today to be real narratives. 
 
There is of course nothing new about this tendency towards greater brevity, simplicity, and visual 
representation, stories merely carry this trend to the extreme. The story feature, in its conception 
as  in  its  construction  and  the  uses  it  offers,  is  inseperable  from  its  digital  environment,  not  so 
much  because  this  environment  is  by  definiton  and  by  its  very  nature  detemporalizing,  but 
because the underlying calculations, in both the mathematical and economic-strategic senses of 
the  word,  are  driven  by  commercial  logic  rather  than  by  social  or  cultural  aims.  From  this 
perspective, the story simply intensifies the logic behind storytelling by taking advantage of the 
potential for emotional impact inherent in stories, but here completely deprived of its (hi)story – in 
both  senses:  the  past  of  narratives  and  the  narrative  content  –  as  well  as  of  its  spirit,  since 
temporality is only useful in this context insofar as it helps to observe changes in behavior – and 
even  then,  only  the  result  is  of  importance.  The  problem  is  therefore  not  so  much  that  an 
atemporal  calculation  is  the  basis  for  the  functioning  of  the  digital,  but  rather  that  its  uses  are 
dominated by economic powers which alone have the capacity – both the necessary resources 
and the accumulated know-how – to invent and implement features to be proposed to users, or 
even to impose these, by exploiting very human desires and impulses. This does not however 
impede the emergence of creative practices – we have already witnessed some examples such 
as the micro-booktrailers proposed by the New York Public Library on Instagram31.  

Futher Questions 

In our current digital environment, constructing and transmitting a narrative in the classical sense 
of the term,  a  practice  which  requires  time,  or  creating  experimental forms  which question  the 
limits  of  the  narrative  form  without  immediately  providing  a  satisfactory  answer,  both  imply 
swimming against the tide, rendered stronger by the features made available by the owners of 
the social networks which dominate our communications. We have presented two fictional works 
which raise these questions in their own ways, built around two current phenomena in our digital 
lives, and which do not yet hold an established place in narrative disourse: notifications and data 
flows. The former allows creators to introduce and integrate fictional time into the reader’s real 
time,  whilst  the  latter  uses  the  real time  of  events  taking  place  in  the real  world  to  structure  a 
fictional  work,  lending  meaning  to  a  flow  of  information  and  transforming  it  into  a  human 
experience.  These  two  examples  also  show  that  interactivity  and  dataflows  raise  questions 
around  temporality,  as  this  inevitably  becomes  entwined  with  that  of  fictionality  and  its  limits, 

                                                
30  The  Robert  French  dictionary  has  already  integrated  the  term,  qualifying  it  as  an  anglicism,  with  the  following 
definition: “Image ou brève vidéo publiée par un internaute sur un réseau social et visible pendant une courte durée” 
(“Image  or 
time.”) 
(https://dictionnaire.lerobert.com/definition/story). 
 
31 https://www.instagram.com/stories/highlights/17852114806307682/. 

short  video  published  by  a  web-user  and  visible 

for  a 

short 

length  of 

 

19 

inviting creators and users to rethink these borders and the traditional binary distinction between 
fiction  and  reality32.  If  the  classical  narrative  aims  for  and  encourages  the  immersion  of  the 
reader/viewer  through  movement  from  real  space-time  towards  fictional  space-time,  the  new 
narrative forms allow the emergence of fictional space-time in (and thanks to) real space-time, via 
a movement that not only crosses, but also deconstructs frontiers. 
 
While  these  two  works  question  the  relations  between  narrative,  temporality  and  digital 
environment, our third example invites us to rethink our conception of narrative as it is defined by 
classical  and  post-classical  narratology,  adopting  the  term  and  using  it  to  designate  entirely 
different phenomena and practices. This radical otherness expresses itself through the relation to 
time  –  the  temporality  imposed  by  the  feature,  that  of  the  content  it  proposes,  and  that  of  the 
users. We have seen how the temporality of stories is doubly limited by the networks to an internal 
duration  of  a  few  seconds  and  to  a  lifespan  of  one  day.  We  are  in  the  sphere  of  the 
moment(aneous) and the ephemeral, neither of which are designed to foster lasting memories, 
or at least not to take their place in the archives, but which are nonetheless there to be seen, to 
have  a  double (and  slightly  prolonged)  existence,  thanks to these forms  of representation,  but 
always as moments. The function of these  stories is no longer to establish temporal or causal 
links between events, but simply to include them in what could be referred to as “the life of the 
network(s)”, that  enormous,  constantly  changing pixelated  showcase,  the  cohesion  of  which  is 
only  guaranteed  by  links  of  “friendship”  –  another  term  which  has  undergone  an  evolutionary 
process since its adoption by the networks to refer to the links between their members.   
 
We should  probably  avoid  trying  to  essentialize  time  and  think  rather  in  terms of  digital  space 
(Vitali-Rosati, 2020). Marcello Vitali-Rosati invites us to consider narratives in relation to spatiality 
rather then temporality. Temporality is linear (before and after), whereas on the Internet we are 
especially  confronted  with  “relations  of  distance  and  proximity,  of  visibility  and  invisibility,  of 
accessibility  and  inaccessibility,  of  the  central  position  and  the  peripheral”,  that  is  to  say  with 
creating  a  space.  On  the  Internet,  we  notably  create  our  collective  identity  through  spatial 
interactions,  and  even  the  notion  of  “editorialization”  is  defined  by  Vitali-Rosati  as  “the  set  of 
dynamics which produce our digital space”. It is precisely in this digital space that  stories also 
take form; the succession of moments, with no other link between them than their juxtaposition 
by an algorithm and (judging by what we can see) without any consideration for the content, is 
presented in the digital space, with the frames of each of the stories lined up, available for the 
user to consult, and then launch the viewing process, following their temporal sucession. Rather 
than a narrative sequence constructed by a person, the user receives a sequence compiled by 
an algorithm. The moment or the content editorialized by the person who has lived or created this 
moment  integrates  a  second  process,  algorithmic  and  opaque  this  time,  which  operates  its 
inclusion  in  a  sequence  of  other  moments  and  contents  created  by  other  people.  It  is  more  a 
question  of  procedure  and  performance  than  narrative  as  construed  by  Ricoeur,  a  temporal 
construction which does not create or modify meaning but nevertheless fills a / the / our digital 
space.  

                                                
32 On this subject see Fülöp (2021). 

 

20 

In 1985, Paul Ricoeur observed that “new narrative forms, which we do not yet know how to name, 
are already being born, which will bear witness to the fact that the narrative function can still be 
metamorphosed, but not so as to die” (Ricoeur, 1999). The question we may ask ourselves today 
is how extensive this metamorphosis might be, and how far can we push the limits of the “narrative 
function”  without  it  losing  its  meaning,  the  meaning  attributed  to  it  by  Ricoeur.  Are  we  today 
witnessing a fundamental transformation of what we call narrative? Are our desire and need for 
“oldstyle” narrative strong enough to resist the planetary tide of  stories, and the networks’ and 
algorithmic processes’ powers of redefinition? Should we be afraid of such an evolution? Could 
not such a change be inscribed in the long history of human civilisations, which have already seen 
so many transformations, including the birth of the narrative as we still know it today?  

The above questions suggest that the stake here is not simply what might happen to narrative 
forms,  but  what  might  happen  to  us,  deprived  of  narrative  in  the  classical  sense,  and  how  we 
might function without it. In other words, to what extent are our consciousness and our powers of 
reflection truly dependent on narratives, and how prepared are we to consider alternative modes 
of  functioning?33 For  instance,  would  thinking  by  and  through  network  as  primary  structure  be 
possible, with the cohesion of moments and fragments  would be created by connections other 
than the temporal and/or causal ones? We may not be facing a total and definitive disappearance 
of  narratives,  but  rather  a  relativisation  of  their  place  in  our  culture,  history  and  theoretical 
constructions, and a multiplication of modes of representing and performing time.  

We must however recognize that for now, we are still inside the system of thought where narrative 
seems not only indispensable, but also very dominant, and are incapable of thinking beyond. The 
narrative  as  a  framework  for  intelligibility  can  thus  be  seen  as  one  of  those  “great  narratives” 
whose demise was announced by Lyotard, but which continue to stucture our perception of the 
world  –  the  past,  the  present,  and  the  future.  When  we  tell  the  story  of  narrative,  and  of  the 
evolution of  stories on the network, with the challenge they present to  traditional narrative, the 
latter stands firm, supported by the weight of its history, and we too easily confer the role of the 
“bad guy” to the newcomer, as we in turn enter into the polarizing logic of storytelling. It is only 
when we open our minds to the idea that other paths are possible that we can engage in serious 
and  nuanced  reflection  about  the  evoluton  of  our  relationship  to  narrative,  to  time,  and  to 
technology.    

References 

- Bachimont, B. (2010). Le sens de la technique : le numérique et le calcul. Paris: Editions Les 
Belles Lettres, collection « encre marine ». 
 -  Bachimont,  B.  (2014).  "Availability  and  the  transformation  of  objects  into  heritage:  digital 
technology and the passing of time". In B. Dufrêne (Ed.), Heritage and Digital Humanities: how 
should training practices evolve ? Berlin: LIT, 49-70. 

                                                
33 Galen Strawson, in a well-known article, (2008) already suggests that "There are deeply non-Narrative people and 
there are good ways to live that are deeply non-Narrative". 
 

 

21 

-  Bachimont, B. (2021). "Écriture et code, motivation du sens et arbitraire du calcul", seminar "Le 
champ du signe", 20th April 2021, ESAD Amiens. 
- Baroni et Gunti (2020). Introduction à l'étude des cultures numériques - La transition numérique 
des médias. Paris: Armand Colin. 
- Bogost, I. (2007). Persuasive Games: The Expressive Power of Videogames. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 
- Bouchardon, S. (2019). “Mind the gap! 10 gaps for digital literature?”, Electronic Book Review. 
URL: http://electronicbookreview.com/essay/mind-the-gap-10-gaps-for-digital-literature/ 
-  Cayley,  J.  (2018).  Grammalepsy.  Essay  on  Digital  Language  Art.  New  York  and  London: 
Bloomsbury Academic. 
- Chambefort, F. (2020). "Sortir de l’écran : Lucette, Gare de Clichy". In Gervais, B. and Marcotte, 
S. (eds.), Attention à la marche ! Penser la littérature électronique en culture numérique. Montréal: 
Les Presses de l’Écureuil - ALN/NT2. pp. 327-338. ISBN 979-10-384-0004-7. 
- Easterlin, Nancy (2012). A Biocultural Approach to Literary Theory and Interpretation. Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins UP. 
- Fludernik, M. (2009).  An Introduction to Narratology, Londres: Routledge. 
- Fülöp, E. (2021). “Virtual mirrors: reflexivity in digital literature”. In Fülöp, E. (dir.), in collaboration 
with Priest, G. and Saint-Gelais, R., Fictionality, Factuality, and Reflexivity across Discourses and 
Media. Berlin : De Gruyter. pp. 229-254. 
- Genette, G. (1972). "Discours du récit", dans Figures III. Paris: Seuil. 
- Herman, D. (2013). Storytelling and the Sciences of Mind. Cambridge: MIT. 
- Manovich, L. (2001). The language of New Media. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
-  Mayer,  A.,  Bouchardon,  S.  (2020).  "The  Digital  Subject:  From  Narrative  Identity  to  Poetic 
Identity? ", Electronic Book Review, mai 2020. 
URL: https://electronicbookreview.com/essay/the-digital-subject-from-narrative-identity-to-poetic-identity/ 
-  Picard  ,  M.  (2021).  "La  smartfiction,  quand  l'environnement  numérique  fictionnel  s'hybride  à 
l'environnement numérique personnel", XXIIème congrès de la SFSIC. 
-  Revaz,  F.  (2009).  Introduction  à  la  narratologie.  Action  et  narration.  Brussels:  De  Boeck. 
- Ricoeur, P. (1985). Temps et récit, 3 vol. Paris: Seuil. 
- Ricœur, P., McLaughlin, K, & Pellauer, D. (1984). Time and narrative, vol 1. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press. 
- Schmid, W. (2005). Elemente der Narratologie. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
- Stiegler, B. (1998). "Les enjeux de la numérisation des objets temporels", in Cinéma et dernières 
technologies, Beau F., Dubois Ph. and Leblanc G (eds.). Paris : INA editions and Brussels:  De 
Boeck & Larcier. 
-  Strawson,  G.  (2008).  “Against  Narrativity”,  in  Real  Materialism  and  Other  Essays,  Oxford  : 
Clarendon Press. 
- Vitali-Rosati, M. (2020). « Qu’est-ce que l’écriture numérique ? », Corela [Online], HS-33.  
URL: http://journals.openedition.org/corela/11759 
- Walsh, R., Stepney, S. (2018). Narrating Complexity. London: Springer. 
- Zunshine, L. (2006). Why We Read Fiction? Columbus, OH: Ohio UP. 

 

 

22 

