Colin Post 
Assistant Professor in Library and Information Science 
University of North Carolina at Greensboro 
ELO 2021 Conference Paper 
 

On the Platform’s Ruins: Practicing a Poetics of Obsolescence 

 
Abstract 
 
Visual artists, writers, and other cultural producers have long leveraged networked 
technologies to establish platforms that circulate cultural products in participatory contexts 
intentionally distinct from cultural institutions. As technologies change over time—including 
deprecated plug-ins and linkrot—these platforms fall into various states of decay. In this 
paper, I examine an example of a platform, the Net Art Latino Database (2000-2005), an 
effort to document net-based artworks vulnerable to obsolescence that stands as a precarious 
monument to an earlier era of digital culture. The Database was initiated by the Uruguayan 
artist Brian Mackern to compile examples of net art activity by Latinx artists, working at the 
periphery of English-language dominant net art communities. 
 
The Database functions as an art platform in the sense offered by Olga Goriunova: a dynamic 
configuration of people and technologies amplifying new kinds of creative activities that push 
beyond the boundaries of existing categories of cultural production. The lines between 
categories like ‘net art’ and ‘electronic literature’ are often blurry, as artists and writers deploy 
the same technologies and pursue similar aesthetic strategies to circulate digital cultural 
production online. Coded by hand in HTML, Mackern’s work exemplifies the scribal 
practices that were the foundation of early Web culture. The text-based work consists entirely 
of descriptions of other artworks and links to other projects, which can now be read as a work 
of ekphrastic hypertext, evoking multimedia artworks that no longer readily circulate 
online—and may no longer materially exist beyond this description.  
 
A deeper understanding of Mackern’s artistic and curatorial practices can help to shape 
professional perspectives on the preservation of net art, electronic literature, and digital 
cultural production more generally. Unlike a traditional cultural heritage institution, the 
diverse artworks included in the database are documented as part of a living, interconnected 
media ecology. Rather than adaptively preserving individual works through migration to new 
technological environments, Mackern’s Database enacts a poetics of obsolescence, carefully 
stewarding works on a platform built with the recognition of its own fragility. 
 
Platforms are built crumbling 
 

Visual artists, writers, and other cultural producers have long leveraged networked 
technologies to establish platforms that circulate cultural products in participatory contexts 
intentionally distinct from cultural institutions. In part, these platforms promise cultural 
producers the potential to distribute works broadly and on their own terms, beyond the reach 
of a museum and beyond the purview of a publisher. For instance, Carl Loeffler frames the 
Art Com Electronic Network, a pre-Web example of an “electronic gathering place” for 
artists to share digital art projects, as “an alternative to exclusivity in the arts, by inviting 
collaboration among individuals from all walks of life” (321). But along with the promises of 
working at the periphery come the risks of exclusion and obscurity. These conditions have 
long been the norm for cultural producers engaged with digital technologies, with work 

 

1 

This tide is perhaps finally shifting, or rather has been unavoidably and 

featured in specialized ‘new media’ spheres largely ignored by mainstream art worlds. 
Writing in 2012, Claire Bishop describes this paradoxical situation, in which digital and 
networked technologies have radically reshaped social and cultural life in countless ways, 
and yet artworks thematizing these issues remain on the outskirts (436). 
 
apocalyptically overcome by the tsunami of the Covid-19 pandemic that has forced all sectors 
of society to confront the realities of the immanently networked world. As arts institutions 
scramble to contrive their own online arts platforms that maintain a virtual veneer of prestige, 
Artie Vierkant reminds us that there is a long history of artist-driven platforms to inform a 
radical refashioning of the art world. Here, though, is another risk of working at the 
periphery: obsolescence. As hyperlinks rot and plug-ins deprecate, the history of artist-driven 
platforms resides in memories and screenshots. Verena Kuni notes that while arts institutions 
have (occasionally) paid attention to ‘new media’ art, they have largely not paid the ongoing 
costs needed to maintain this body of artistic heritage over the long-term: “that many early 
works were not documented in time with the available art-historical tools turns out to be an 
existential problem, primarily for an art history that aspires to be worthy of its name” (194-5). 
The archives of digital culture are inherently lossy. 

Artists have learned not to rely on these institutions for the preservation of their 

cultural memory, lessons gleaned from working on the periphery. Annet Dekker considers 
how “networks of care,” formed by audiences, other artists, and small organizations, can be 
crucial for stewarding works over time (89). However, these cooperative efforts require 
resources—time, technical expertise, labor, and money—to work against the fast onset of 
obsolescence. Artists exploring novel creative possibilities of the latest digital technologies 
are often quickly forced onto the ‘upgrade path.’ Terry Harpold discusses the many 
challenges of accessing older works of electronic literature from a scholar’s perspective (4-7), 
and artists and cultural producers negotiate similar challenges as they struggle to preserve 
personal digital archives documenting their careers. For online art platforms, which function 
only through the careful coordination of technological dependencies, the infrastructure is 
crumbling from the start. 
 
Preservation immanent to creation 
 
 
outside the walls of traditional institutions makes it imperative to understand how cultural 
producers themselves approach preservation. Given the rapid rate of technological 
obsolescence, preservation can become immanent to creation, an integral part of staging 
platforms from the first. The Netart Latino Database (2000-2005),1 a platform created by 
Uruguayan artist Brian Mackern to document net-based artworks by Latinx artists, provides 
an illustrative example (see figs. 1 and 2). Over the course of a half-decade, Mackern 
amassed numerous examples of Latin American net art and e-lit and compiled them into a 
public-facing website. Essentially a descriptive list of these creative projects coded in 
straightforward Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), the Database now stands as a 
precarious monument to an earlier era of digital culture—many of the links to these projects 
have since rotted, though Mackern’s curation-as-creative practice has left a record of these 
defunct artworks. 

The significance of online art platforms in the creation and curation of digital culture 

In an artist’s book and accompanying collection of essays, curator Nilo Casares 

narrates a tour of the Database guided by Mackern. Browsing in 2009, just four years after 
Mackern stopped actively updating the Database, the pair encounter many dead-ends: 404 

 
1 http://netart.org.uy/latino/index.html 

 

2 

error messages or projects that no longer function on current browsers. For instance, 
Influenza’s Skin (2002) by Rafael Marchetti required a deprecated Quicktime plug-in and did 
not work in 2009; today, the server hosting the work is no longer located at the URL listed in 
the Database. This particular work has left other traces on the Web—a catalog record in the 
runme.org software art registry,2 a blurb and blurry screenshot from an online exhibition 
featuring the work3—but all point back to the same aimless link. Putting these pieces 
together, we can arrive at an effaced ekphrasis: an experience of “contaminacón 
communicativa,” an entropic system that causes layers of noisy interference to seep across 
application windows, a browser virus that impedes the expected ‘user experience’ but instead 
prompts altered reading practices.4 Perhaps fitting for a work that enacts a breakdown of the 
browser interface as a kind of contamination, the virus has been thoroughly contained within 
obsolesced technologies. 

The current state of Influenza’s Skin exemplifies that of many of the other projects 

included in the Database. Some URLs still successfully resolve, leading to functioning 
artworks. In Sanctu (1999) by Brazilian artist Celso Reeks, a project that does continue to 
work on current web browsers, viewers navigate through polychromatic collages made from 
clip art saints in order to arrive at a disquieting error message: “Url ‘god’ not found on 
server.”5 For the more mundane broken links, Mackern’s descriptive notes provide evocative 
if woefully incomplete information for net-based artworks often left unmentioned in art 
historical studies and museum exhibitions of this crucial period of web culture. 

If net-based art has circulated on the periphery of the mainstream art world, Latinx net 

art has been even further marginalized. Mackern describes this broad exclusion as a major 
impetus of the project, as a response to the “very obvious northern-centralist slant” to the 
academic and institutional discourse emerging around net-based in the late 90s (142). The 
same handful of North American and European artists feature in conversations sustained 
through North American and European art communities and organizations. Prompted by 
Mackern’s documentation of Influenza’s Skin, I can place this work with other “artist’s 
browsers,” like The Web Stalker by the British collective I/O/D, that have been more 
thoroughly discussed in major studies of digital art (Paul, 117-120). Similar to these browser 
artworks, Influenza’s Skin intervenes at the level of the interface, interrupting familiar 
paradigms of interaction and pushing viewers to grapple with alternative metaphors for 
networked information beyond the electronic page. Although the body of the artwork is no 
longer accessible, the Database holds this shadow of metaphor, an “image of potentiality” 
that, as Belinda Barnet argues, can inform our understanding of technology in the present and 
future (5). 

 

 

2 http://runme.org/project/+influenzaskin/  
3 http://netescopio.meiac.es/muestras/intrusiones-e/04.htm  
4 This description is stitched together from the cited sources, and the quoted “contaminacón communicativa,” or 
communicative contamination, is taken directly from Mackern’s entry for the work on the Database. 
5 https://distopia.com/sanctu/index.html  

 

3 

Figure 1 Brian Mackern. netart latino database, 2000-2005. Website. Available from: 
http://netart.org.uy/latino/index.html (accessed April 21, 2021). Used with permission of the 
artist. 
 

 

 

4 

 

Figure 2 Brian Mackern. netart latino database, 2000-2005. Website. Available from: 
http://netart.org.uy/latino/index.html (accessed April 21, 2021). Used with permission of the 
artist. 

In addition to creating a record of net-based artworks that have not been thoroughly 

documented or discussed otherwise, Mackern’s Database importantly places these works in a 
broader geopolitical and cultural context of Latin America. Mackern signals this intent to 
represent a distinctly Latinx web culture both in the name of the project as well as the 
organizational principle of grouping artworks together by country of origin. As Lila Pagola 
observes, Mackern’s ASCII rendition of Joaquín Torres García’s inverted map of America 
(1943) serves as an immediate visual indication of the driving motivation to center Latinx 
artists (see fig. 1) (36). Viewers begin their journey through the Database with a map on 
which country-code top-level domains name the nation-states. Clicking on the URL .AR, for 
example, takes the viewer to the list of artworks by Argentinian artists. The viewer sees 
Influenza’s Skin, for instance, placed among other Argentinian net-based artworks, and from 
Mackern’s ‘travel notes,’ the viewer learns that Marchetti was actually living in Brazil at the 

 

5 

time of making the work. These contextual details, while scant, build out the shadow of 
metaphor, adding depth—in short, a history—and offering details that current viewers can 
pursue in their media archaeological excavation of this net-based artwork. 

Still, Pagola questions what it means for net art of any kind to be ‘from’ a place. The 
global promise of the World Wide Web is in its name, and this goal of the Web is an aim of 
networked technologies more generally: to circulate information broadly rather than situate it 
specifically. In her study of locality in Latin American net art, Claire Taylor points out that 
networked technologies may challenge and transform our understandings of geography and 
place, but “this does not mean that place is erased altogether” (4). Taylor argues that offline 
places feature prominently in Latin American digital culture in particular, with Latinx net 
artists often taking up digital technologies to tactically counter dominant representations of 
contested spaces using the very tools deployed by imperial and capitalist forces (11-12). 
While not explicitly political in its intent, the Database does undertake this kind of 
reterritorialization, mapping the social relationships of a network of artists with shared 
geopolitical affinities on top of a network of webpages and servers (Mackern and Baigorri 
80). Just as many of the webpages have moved to new URLs or ceased to exist altogether, the 
Database is a map of these social relations at a particular time, although the contours of the 
networked terrain may have since changed beyond recognition. 
 
Platform of scribal practices 
 
 
As well as a map, we can also think about Mackern’s Database as a platform. In the 
popular lexicon, this term brings to mind social media services like Twitter and Instagram: 
online spaces that provide users with tools for creating and sharing content. Ian Bogost and 
Nick Montfort, leading scholars in platform studies, adopt a broader view of computational 
platforms as systems that provide bases for creativity and cultural production. The Database 
does not fit especially well with either of these definitions, as it is an effort of a single creator 
and was not built for a particular piece of hardware or software; but I would argue that we 
can understand this artwork as a platform in that it brings together diverse strains of cultural 
production into a shared space, generating new resonances across the works the process. In a 
word, Mackern’s curation constitutes this as a platform. 

This emphasis on curation is also found in Olga Goriunova’s description of online art 
platforms as “experiments in the aesthetics of organization” (9). For Goriunova, art platforms 
are not necessarily defined by any specific piece of hardware or software (though they can 
take these forms), but rather by an organizational aesthetics that emerges from living, 
fluctuating assemblages of human and machine elements, all working together to amplify 
creative efforts to point of “brilliance” (20). More than a definition, Goriunova provides a 
theoretical framework for understanding platforms as participating in processes of cultural 
production. As with the Database, examples that Goriunova uses to illustrate her theory, like 
the runme.org software repository,6 cull together and classify digital cultural products that 
skirt traditional fine arts genres and occupy the margins (if recognized at all) of mainstream 
art worlds. Devising such an organizational scheme is itself creative, and this scheme, in turn, 
helps to shape the aesthetic experience of the constituent works. Describing the Database as 
an art platform serves to highlight the curatorial effort driving the project, which is to 
legitimize Latinx digital culture by preserving it from precarity. 

The Database reflects an attention to the fragility of digital technology that is 
apparent across Mackern’s body of work. For instance, in a contemporaneous work La 
Máquina Podrida (The Rotten Machine) (1999-2004), Mackern preserves his aging laptop 

6 http://runme.org/  

 

 

6 

In part, the ‘low-tech’ aesthetic of a hand-coded HTML page reflects disparities in 

containing a vast archives of his own digital output interleaved with numerous files from 
projects by artistic friends and collaborators.7 The Database is outward-facing corollary to La 
Máquina, curating a public rather than private directory of digital artworks, though both 
foreground the extensive labor required to maintain creative work in digital formats against 
technological obsolescence. A visitor to the Database need pause for only a moment to 
recognize the scope of this work as they browse entry after entry in a long-scrolling list of 
Latinx net art projects that Mackern has personally encountered on the Web and then 
documented, with details of each artwork encoded with care in HTML. 
 
technological access between the Global North and South, which Mackern himself describes 
as encouraging a “craftsman-like way of handling things to find the best possible solution 
with the resources at hand” (Mackern and Baigorri 76). A simple HTML page of text and 
links would have loaded quickly and cheaply in Latin American Internet Cafes or on low-
bandwidth home connections. But this “manual personalization” of “prehistoric resource 
spaces” evident in the Database evokes an earlier era of web culture more broadly (Mackern 
159), recalling the late 90s homepages and other experiments in HTML that net artist Olia 
Lialina describes as a “vernacular web.” Like a scribe constructing a manuscript page, these 
early web users crafted their sites from a hard-won, intimate knowledge of technologies of 
production. Both in its own making and in the projects documented, the Database is a 
platform of scribal practices. 
 
approach to curating the Database has also helped the platform to withstand 20 years of 
technological obsolescence. As discussed above, many of the featured artworks projects have 
succumbed to this erosive force even as the overall platform persists in essentially the same 
form on current browsers as it would have appeared on Netscape Navigator. For instance, a 
version of the Database rendered in a Netscape Navigator 4 emulator betrays no significant 
differences in structure, user interaction, or content (see fig. 3).8 As the platform is 
fundamentally a descriptive list, its contents can be readily un-digitized as well, translated 
into a more stable paper format. Mackern collaborated with the Museo Extremeño e 
Iberoamericano de Arte Contemporáneo in Badajoz, Spain to produce such an artist’s book 
documenting the project. 
 

Perhaps adopted out of necessity, as the best use of the tools at hand, this ‘low-tech’ 

 

7 http://podrida.netart.org.uy/. This laptop has been collected by the Museo Extremeño e Iberoamericano de Arte 
Contemporáneo in Badajoz, Spain, which also maintains a mirror of the Database. 
8 I used oldweb.today for this emulation. OldWeb.Today is part of a suite of free and open-source web archiving 
tools made available by Webrecorder. OldWeb.Today emulates a range of classic web browsers directly inside a 
current browser environment. 

 

7 

Figure 3 Screenshot of the Database on a Netscape Navigator 4 emulator. 

 

I have consulted a re-digitized PDF copy of this book, and I have cited the 

accompanying essays frequently throughout the present paper, though this has been an 
imperfect experience of the analog object. Josephine Bosma notes from her interactions with 
a physical copy how a dot-matrix print-out of the Database spills out as a manifest scroll 
from the cardboard binding of the book (121). An interested viewer could perform their own 
printing at home: the entirety of the Database fills 42 8½x11-inch pages. These paper 
versions convey distinct and valuable experiences of the artwork, but they do put the 
Database at an even further remove from the network of artists the platform serves to 
document. Attempting to tap a link on a print-out will not even get as far as a 404 error, I 
must sadly report. These retrograde preservation approaches are illustrations of the platform’s 
resilience, though not (as of yet) necessary to maintain immediate access to the project, which 
can still be visited at its original URL by essentially any Internet-connected device anywhere 
in the world. 
 
To study disrepair 
 

The scribal practices fundamental to the platform’s construction make possible this 
versatile translation across print and digital media. Though Mackern’s Database has often 
been discussed in terms of the visual arts, the writerly activities driving the platform—
ekphrastic description, history, elegy—suggest connections between net art and e-lit of the 
early Web era that have not been thoroughly explored. The Database can itself be read now 
as a work of hypertext, a parable of the Garden of Dead-Ends. A critical concern shared by 
both net art and web-based e-lit is that it all faces serious threats to preservation, dependent as 
it is on a dynamic Internet infrastructure that becomes increasingly alien to the networked 
ecosystem of this earlier era with each passing year. For much of this era of web culture, we 
confront what Stuart Moulthrop and Dene Grigar call the “Sappho Syndrome,” grasping 
toward more holistic experiences of past works through fragments and secondary references 
(230). 

 

8 

This “Sappho Syndrome” is not just a future threat—nor is it even an especially novel 

condition afflicting web culture—as we can see Mackern himself was battling against this 
loss of Latinx net art even while he was constructing the Database some twenty years ago. 
That the platform persists today even as many of the featured works have decayed speaks to 
the immense effort Mackern exerted in its curation and construction. In fact, the amount of 
(volunteered and unremunerated) labor required to update and maintain the Database became 
untenable and contributed to Mackern’s decision to abandon the project (Mackern and 
Baigoirri 80). Scholars and professional memory workers concerned with digital culture are 
well served to study disrepair, first understanding how artists often undertake difficult 
preservation labor to maintain artworks in varying states of dilapidation as part of the creative 
process. 

The Database embodies such a poetics of obsolescence as Mackern weaves already-

deteriorating technologies into the foundation of the platform. Though the work falls apart, it 
was built crumbling. Despite its digital nature, the Database does not adhere to the particular 
binary logic of inactive/active. Instead, it crumbles to pieces over time, without any single 
technological shift precipitating utter collapse. Though I am not advocating that, in all cases, 
we should simply step back and appreciate the ruins, this poetics of obsolescence can inform 
preservation approaches more generally. Given that online art platforms like the Database 
exist in networked ecologies that cut across or totally outside traditional cultural heritage 
institutions, professional memory workers will need to adapt conservation strategies that 
resemble the constructive curation practices employed by artists like Mackern. The Netart 
Latino Database is a handbook for just this purpose.  
 
Works Cited 
 
Barnet, Belinda. Memory Machines: The Evolution of Hypertext. Anthem Press, 2013. 
 
Bishop, Claire. “Digital Divide.” Artforum, vol. 51, no. 1, Sept. 2012, pp. 435–41. 
 
Bogost, Ian, and Nick Montfort. “Platform Studies: Frequently Questioned Answers.” Digital  

Arts and Culture, 2009. 

 
Bosma, Josephine. Nettitudes: Let’s Talk Net Art. NAi Publishers, 2011. 
 
Casares, Nilo “el siete de enero de dos mil nueve.” Netart Latino Database, edited by Nilo  
Casares, Museo Extremeño e Iberoamericano de Arte Contemporáneo, 2010, pp. 15-
66. 

 
Dekker, Annet. Collecting and Conserving Net Art: Moving beyond Conventional Methods.  

Taylor and Francis, 2018. 

 
Goriunova, Olga. Art Platforms and Cultural Production on the Internet. Routledge, 2012. 
 
Harpold, Terry. Ex-Foliations: Reading Machines and the Upgrade Path. University of  

Minnesota Press, 2009. 

 
Kuni, Verena. “Why I Never Became a Net Art Historian.” Net Pioneers 1.0: Contextualizing  
Early Net-based Art, edited by Dieter Daniels and Gunther Reisinger, Sternberg Press, 
2010, pp. 181-197. 

 

 

9 

Lialina, Olia. A Vernacular Web. Indigenous and Barbarians. 2005,  

http://art.teleportacia.org/observation/vernacular/. 

 
Loeffler, Carl. “The Art Com Electronic Network.” Leonardo, vol. 21, no. 3, June 1988, pp.  

320–21. 

 
Mackern, Brian “Netart Latino ‘Database.’” Netart Latino Database, edited by Nilo Casares,  

Museo Extremeño e Iberoamericano de Arte Contemporáneo, 2010, pp. 141-161. 

 
Mackern, Brian and Laura Baigorri “netart latino database: El Mapeo Emocional de la Red.”  
Netart Latino Database, edited by Nilo Casares, Museo Extremeño e Iberoamericano  
de Arte Contemporáneo, 2010, pp. 69-83. 

 
Moulthrop, Stuart, and Dene Grigar. Traversals: The Use of Preservation for Early Electronic  

Writing. MIT Press, 2017. 

 
Pagola, Lila. “netart latino database: El Mapa Invertido del net.art latinoamericano.” Netart  
Latino Database, edited by Nilo Casares, Museo Extremeño e Iberoamericano de Arte 
Contemporáneo, 2010, pp. 33-65. 

 
Paul, Christiane. Digital Art. Third edition., Thames and Hudson, 2015. 
 
Taylor, Claire. Place and Politics in Latin American Digital Culture: Location and Latin  

American Net Art. Routledge, 2014.  

 
Vierkant, Artie. “Flatten the Cube: Post-Internet Art’s Lessons for Our Current Crisis and  

What Comes After.” Art in America, Apr. 2020. https://www.artnews.com/art-in-
america/features/flatten-the-cube-post-internet-arts-lessons-for-our-current-crisis-and-
what-comes-after-1202685356/. 

 
 

 

10 

