	

	

Beyond Maximalism: Resolving the Novelistic Incompatibilities of Realism, Paranoia, 

Omniscience, and Encyclopedism through Electronic Literature. 

 

Abstract: 

In The Maximalist Novel, Ercolino defines a type of novel that displays multiform maximizing and 

hypertrophic tension. He lists Pynchon’s Gravity’s Rainbow (1973) and Mason & Dixon (1997), 

Wallace’s Infinite Jest (1996), DeLillo’s Underworld (1997), Smith’s White Teeth (2000), Franzen’s 

The Corrections (2001), and Bolaño’s 2666 (2004) as examples of the term, and classifies the 

maximalist novel using ten elements: length, encyclopedic mode, dissonant chorality, diegetic 

exuberance, completeness, narratorial omniscience, paranoid imagination, intersemioticity, ethical 

commitment, and hybrid realism. While Ercolino’s ten elements accurately identify and classify a 

significant novel form that has emerged, I argue that these elements are incompatible with one 

another, which has resulted in criticisms of maximalist novels, as well as a number of maximalist 

novelists to abandon the form. While Ercolino argues that these incompatibilities represent an 

‘internal dialectic’ of the genre, I argue that this is too conflicting to be stable as a novelistic form. 

These incompatibilities include the incompatibility of multiple (hybrid) realisms, the incompatibility 

of paranoid imagination with ethical commitment, and the incompatibilities of narratorial omniscience 

and an encyclopedic mode with a persuasive realism. By examining contemporary fictional works 

written by previously maximalist novelists, I reassess Ercolino’s ten elements in order to identify the 

reasons why certain authors have moved beyond the limits of his definition. In so doing, I compare 

and contrast Ercolino’s ‘maximalist novel’ with Woods’s ‘hysterical realism,’ and Johnston’s ‘novel 

of information multiplicity.’ Using the Franzen and Smith corpuses as examples, this paper speculates 

on the future form of the novel as it progresses into the 21st Century. From this literary interrogation, 

I apply these conclusions to my digital creative practice by developing the digital novel The Perfect 

Democracy (funded by the Australia Council for the Arts). This work takes as its subject the entire 

population of contemporary Australia. Such a vast subject is impossible to represent in a work of 

	

1	

	

	

fiction. The whole work is presented as a 3D frame-like artefact, that can be navigated as a whole, 

allowing readers to be presented with a multivalent, broad-canvas novel, while resolving the 

paradoxical issues identified in my interrogation of Ercolino. I propose that this will be achieved by 

utilizing Calvino’s Six Memos. Images of Australian currency will be used as a structural device to 

remove weight by representing the whole society from the richest to the poorest in the quickest way 

possible, and a multitude of simultaneous digital writing formats and voices will be used to precisely 

depict characterization. 

Keywords:  

 

maximalist novel – realism – relatedness – paranoia – narratorial omniscience 

 

	

2	

	

Introduction 

	

Stefano Ercolino defines the maximalist novel as ‘an aesthetically hybrid genre of the contemporary 

novel that develops in the second half of the twentieth century… “Maximalist,” for the multiform 

maximizing and hypertrophic tension of the narrative; “novel,” because the texts… are indeed novels’ 

(xi). He lists Thomas Pynchon’s Gravity’s Rainbow (1973) and Mason & Dixon (1997), David Foster 

Wallace’s Infinite Jest (1996), Don DeLillo’s Underworld (1997), Zadie Smith’s White Teeth (2000), 

Jonathan Franzen’s The Corrections (2001), and Roberto Bolaño’s 2666 (2004) as examples of the 

term, and classifies the maximalist novel using ten elements: length, encyclopedic mode, dissonant 

chorality, diegetic exuberance, completeness, narratorial omniscience, paranoid imagination, 

intersemioticity, ethical commitment, and hybrid realism. While Ercolino’s ten elements accurately 

identify and classify a significant novel form that has emerged, I argue that these elements are 

incompatible with one another, which has resulted in criticisms of maximalist novels, as well as a 

number of maximalist novelists to abandon the form. While Ercolino argues that these 

incompatibilities represent an ‘internal dialectic’ of the genre, I argue that this is too conflicting to be 

stable as a novelistic form. These incompatibilities include the incompatibility of multiple (hybrid) 

realisms, the incompatibility of paranoid imagination with ethical commitment, and the 

incompatibilities of narratorial omniscience and an encyclopedic mode with a persuasive realism. By 

examining contemporary fictional works written by previously maximalist novelists, I reassess 

Ercolino’s ten elements in order to identify the reasons why certain authors have moved beyond the 

limits of his definition, and how this may impact the novel form as it progresses into the 21st Century. 

In so doing, I compare and contrast Ercolino’s ‘maximalist novel’ with James Woods’s ‘hysterical 

realism’ and John Johnston’s ‘novel of information multiplicity.’ Finally, I propose that these issues 

can be resolved through born-digital works, such as the Australia Council for the Arts-funded 

practice-led research project The Perfect Democracy.  

 

Hybrid and Hysterical Realism 

	

3	

	

	

Ercolino claims that in maximalist novels the reader is faced with a unique form of realism, one which 

is ‘heavily conditioned by the powerful antireferential and tautological friction of the artistic act 

running throughout the entire system of the arts in the twentieth century’ (158). He defines this as 

‘hybrid realism.’ This is Ercolino’s final and most important element. 

 

Similar to Ercolino’s ‘maximalist novel,’ literary critic James Wood, in his review of Zadie 

Smith’s White Teeth (“Human, All Too Inhuman”), defines the ‘hysterical realist’ genre, which he 

also classifies with texts similar to those Ercolino uses to define the ‘maximalist novel’. Wood is 

critical of these ‘big, ambitious social novels’ for their conceptual, inhuman characters, which he 

argues result from their insistence on relatedness. He uses the term ‘hysterical’ to denote the 

perpetual-motion of the above-mentioned novels’ plots.  

The Oxford Companion to English Literature states that, as a literary term, ‘realism’ is so 

widely used it is more or less meaningless except ‘when used in contradistinction to some other 

movement.’ In How Fiction Works, Wood argues that literary realism is the origin from which all 

other literature emanates: 

[Realism] teaches everyone else; it schools its own truants: it is what allows magical realism, 

hysterical realism, […] to exist[…] Chekhov’s challenge—“Ibsen just doesn’t know life. In 

life it simply isn’t like that”—is as radical now as it was a century ago, because forms must 

continually be broken. The true writer[…] is one who must always be acting as if life were a 

category beyond anything the novel had yet grasped; as if life itself were always on the verge 

of becoming conventional. (247–8) 

Chekhov’s revolution, Wood argues, is that his characters have the ability to forget that they are 

characters, by wriggling out of the story given them into the ‘bottomless freedom of disappointment,’ 

(90) allowing their inner lives to run at their own speed. It is this form of Chekhovian realism that 

Wood argues is not possible in maximalist/hysterical realist novels.  

Examining Chekhov’s stories, his style, form, and preoccupations are far removed from those 

values Ercolino uses to define the maximalist novel. Not only is Chekhov not a maximalist writer, he 

	

4	

	

	

is also not a novelist. It would therefore come as no surprise that the Chekhovian realism Wood 

endorses is incompatible with the maximalist novel, as it is essentially its antithesis.  

Yet both Ercolino and Wood use the same term: realism. Esty argues that debates over 

literary realism, what he calls ‘realism wars,’ have been ongoing since the late Victorian era. 

Ercolino’s description of ‘hybrid realism’ suggests that the maximalist novels attempt to resolve the 

realism wars by representing multiple ‘realisms’ within a single work. In response to Wood’s 

criticism, Ercolino argues that ‘realism’ and ‘postmodern’ are not incompatible. Wood’s position, 

however, is that such hybridity is not possible, as the interrelatedness necessary for the hybridity to 

exist ultimately taints the Chekhovian realist aesthetic, even if isolated moments within the novel 

successfully depict it. In Information Multiplicity, similar to the maximalist/hysterical realist genre, 

Johnston proposes the ‘novel of information multiplicity’, arguing that this form emerges in an 

environment created by information and web technologies. Johnston and Wood concur that in these 

works the antirealist impulse ultimately defines the novels’ realism. In either case, Ercolino’s element 

‘hybrid realism’ does not resolve the realism wars, but is merely another example of it. 

Wood’s position regarding the incompatibility of ‘realism’ and the ‘postmodern’ can be noted 

in his review of Jonathan Franzen’s The Corrections. Though the ‘maximalist novel’ and ‘hysterical 

realism’ had yet to be defined when Franzen wrote The Corrections, Franzen was aware of the 

predicament Wood articulates, i.e., that excessive relatedness can result in an unpersuasive realism:  

I was torturing the story, stretching it to accommodate ever more of those things-in-the-world 

that impinge on the enterprise of fiction writing. The work of transparency and beauty and 

obliqueness that I wanted to write was getting bloated with issues… The novelist has more 

and more to say to readers who have less and less time to read: Where to find the energy to 

engage with a culture in crisis when the crisis consists in the impossibility of engaging with 

the culture? (66)  

In discussing his writing process, he claims that the dehumanizing quality of contemporary character 

is a reflection of reality, as in contemporary society our lives have become inhumanly interconnected. 

	

5	

	

	

Franzen is therefore arguing against writing a ‘novel of information multiplicity,’ stressing a desire to 

move away from the antirealist impulse that Johnston and Wood argue characterizes the work of 

Pynchon, DeLillo, etc. As a novelist, Franzen wishes to inform and report to the reader on the state of 

the culture. He concedes, however, that the novel no longer serves a function as social instruction. 

Even if the novel serves no role as reportage or social instruction, Franzen maintains that such a novel 

should strive to be all-encompassing (82). In other words, Franzen champions maximalism as an ideal 

in and of itself. Franzen’s solution, then, is to create a ‘broad-canvas novel’ that attempts to make 

interconnectedness human, what Wood calls a ‘softened DeLilloism’. In The Corrections, Franzen 

retains the core ambitions of the maximalist novel, while moving beyond Ercolino’s definition. Wood 

praises this ‘softened DeLillo’ approach, but believes the artistic success of Franzen’s novel is not 

because of its extreme interconnectedness, but in spite of it. Even if the ambitions of the 

maximalist/hysterical realist novelist can coexist with Chekhovian realism, Wood argues that they are 

not comparable. The connection between a ‘malaise in ourselves and in our culture’ is purely 

conceptual and muddies the Chekhovian realism that centers the novel. This suggests that it has 

become impossible for the contemporary novel form to ‘pin down an entire writhing culture.’ 

 

Paranoid Imagination, Ethical Commitment, and the Influence of Kafka 

Ercolino argues that ‘paranoia is one of the most characteristic elements of the postmodern narrative 

universe’ (105). He continues: ‘Everything is linked: this is the unshakeable conviction of the 

paranoid, a conviction that finds its structural equivalent in the direct or indirect interconnection of all 

the stories, of all the characters, and of all the events that proliferate in maximalist novels’ (111). 

Paranoia, then, can be regarded as one of the ‘antirealist impulses’ Ercolino notes in describing 

‘hybrid realism.’ Likewise, Johnston argues that Pynchon and DeLillo’s works are characterized by 

paranoia. In Gravity’s Rainbow, he writes that paranoia is ‘no longer designated a mental disorder but 

rather a critical method of information retrieval’ (62). The paranoid imagination Ercolino defines can 

be observed not only in the novels described, but also in Franz Kafka’s Amerika (1927). Pynchon (in 

	

6	

	

	

Bloom), DeLillo (in DePietro)), Wallace, Rushdie, Smith (in Changing My Mind), and Bolaño (in 

Klenemeier) have all cited the importance of Kafka in relation to their work. For the contemporary 

maximalist novelist, Kafka’s influence appears, fittingly, inescapable. 

Amerika evokes the dreamlike claustrophobia and agoraphobia typical of Kafka’s novels, 

which is due to the novel’s paranoid imagination. The narrative relies on coincidence and excessive 

relatedness. The difference between Kafka’s novel and the novels described, however, is its relation 

to ‘real’ phenomena. While informed by research of the present (Hofmann (in Kafka, Amerika, 1996) 

claims Kafka’s book is ‘up to the minute, with its telephones and gramophones, electric bells and 

electric torches, lifts, the Brooklyn Bridge… [and] an early reference to Coca-Cola’ (xiii)), from the 

opening paragraph in which the Statue of Liberty is seen holding a sword, it becomes clear that 

Kafka’s Amerika bears little resemblance to a ‘real’ experience of a European immigrant in the United 

States. The interconnectedness is persuasive as Kafka establishes a dream-like quality and logic. 

Unlike the hysterical realists, whose close examination of real-world issues creates immediate, 

enclosed context, Kafka’s novels elude such readings. Given contemporary widespread information 

and global awareness, however, writing of other countries, institutions, or cultural groups with such 

disconnect from ‘real’ phenomena presents ethical representational issues.  

In her review of The Maximalist Novel, Hayles notes that Ercolino does not make reference to 

the influence of information technologies, databases, computational media:  

much of the impetus toward the massive information flows apparent in the examples derive 

from the creation and dissemination of the personal computer, the emergence of the web, the 

spread of social media, and the pervasiveness of Internet search engines. (521)  

Hayles continues that these developments undoubtedly explain why the maximalist novel differs from 

other big encyclopedic modernist novels (e.g., Melville’s Moby-Dick and Joyce’s Ulysses). Similarly, 

these developments (i.e., emergence of the web, spread of social media, etc.) highlight a significant 

difference between the paranoid imagination displayed in the works of Kafka and in the contemporary 

	

7	

	

	

maximalist novelists. In other words, one cannot write (or indeed read) as Kafka did in the 

contemporary digital age.  

In the information/networked age, a novel that is structured by paranoia yet aspires towards 

ethical commitment (as Ercolino claims the maximalist novel does) is ultimately at odds with itself. In 

Bolaño’s 2666, for example, the heavy interrelatedness of the novel’s structure draws a comparison 

between the female homicides of Ciudad Juárez and World War II and the Holocaust. It is difficult, 

however, to determine in what capacity one atrocity can or should illuminate another, and how a 

reader should make this comparison. Indeed, 2666’s structure explicitly segregates these components. 

Ercolino posits that his elements can be split into two camps, playing ‘different roles in the internal 

dialectic of the genre’ and that a ‘hierarchy of the materials is always presupposed which guarantees 

the genre’s morphological and symbolic hold’ (114). This he labels the chaos/cosmos function: 

‘anarchy versus order, centrifugal forces versus centripetal forces, chaos versus cosmos’ (115). In 

2666, then, the relationship between female homicides of Ciudad Juárez and the Holocaust could 

either be ‘meaningful’ (cosmos) or simply two independent events that have no correlation (chaos). 

The novel’s ‘paranoid imagination’ that informs the novel’s interrelated structure, however, both 

allows and encourages parallels between the female homicides and the Holocaust. Not only the 

structure, but the meaning of the work is defined by its paranoia. 

The very notion of a ‘cosmos’ function is at odds with maximalist novels’ social realism; in 

the case of 2666, the social realism of the very relentless, specific, almost journalistic approach to the 

female homicides is at odds with a parallel to the Holocaust. Despite the fact that maximalist novels 

are ‘monopolized by themes of great historical, political, and social relevance,’ addressing themes 

such as history, war, drugs, capitalism, and technology (Ercolino, 136–7), the use of paranoid 

imagination to draw connections between these themes lacks ‘ethical commitment’ as it draws 

immoral parallels. 

 

Narratorial Omniscience and Cliché 

	

8	

	

	

Since Wood’s review of Zadie Smith’s White Teeth in which he defines and criticizes ‘hysterical 

realism,’ Smith has written of her shifting approach towards the contemporary novel. Smith argues 

that such ‘hysteria’ is necessary, as in contemporary culture the immediacy of news, political 

commentary, and satire means that the fiction writer who addresses contemporary issues or 

institutions risks cliché: ‘Even if you find [Pynchon, DeLillo, Foster Wallace, etc.] obtuse, they can 

rarely be accused of cliché, and that… is the place where everything dies.’  

 

Smith further explores her desire to make connections in her essay “Rereading Barthes and 

Nabokov.” She finds Barthes’s notion of reader authority appealing as a reader, but paralyzing when 

applied to the act of writing itself. White Teeth, for example, is constructed in such a way as to 

represent a vast multiplicity of voices within the culture. The text stretches itself to accommodate and 

engage with a profusion of public and private issues. To avoid plot immobility, coincidence, 

Dickensian caricature and paranoid imagination are utilized, which has resulted in Wood’s criticisms. 

In her essay, Smith contrasts Barthes’s approach with Nabokov’s assertion of authorial privilege:  

Barthes spoke of the pleasure of the text, Nabokov of asking his students to read “with your 

brain and spine… the tingle in the spine really tells you what the author felt and wishes you to 

feel.” Barthes, though, had no interest in what the author felt or wished you to feel, which is 

where my trouble starts. (43)  

This trouble is the desire to create an authorial text that accounts for the birth of the reader(s) without 

resorting to excessive interrelatedness or the potential cliché of twenty-first-century bourgeois 

political apathy.  

 

Smith attempts to resolve this trouble in her fourth novel NW (2012).  Stylistically, it marks a 

departure from her other work, utilizing a combination of first- and third-person perspective, 

numbered fragments, and typographical arrangements. NW does not display ‘paranoid imagination,’ 

as connected events become tangential, having quiddity in and of themselves. Particularity is based 

primarily on class, rather than ethnicity. Similar to Irie Jones at the conclusion of White Teeth, at the 

conclusion of NW Natalie Blake, feeling decentered and fraudulent, sets up anonymous sex 

	

9	

	

	

encounters via the Internet. Unlike Irie in White Teeth, however, the ‘decentered’ form that reflects 

Keisha/Natalie’s decentered sense of identity makes this choice human and persuasive, rather than 

conceptual or hysterical. At the novel’s conclusion, after Natalie’s affairs have been exposed and she 

loses track of her children in a pet store, Smith writes: ‘She raised her head from her newspaper. She 

called out. Nothing. She walked to the fish, the lizards, the dogs and the cats. Nowhere. She reassured 

herself she wasn’t the hysterical [emphasis mine] type’ (288). 

A significant difference between White Teeth and NW is the novel’s use of omniscient 

narration. Paul Dawson argues that twenty-first century fiction has seen a revival of omniscient 

narration and that this emerges from an ‘encounter with some of the technical experiments of 

postmodern fiction’ (4). In the case of White Teeth, Dawson argues that there are 

substantial passages of digressive and garrulous commentary throughout the novel which 

directly address the reader. …the narrator employs the editorial “we” to rhetorically invoke a 

general consciousness. (128)  

In NW, however, such an authorial voice is absent. Though the novel fluctuates between four different 

characters’ perspectives, the points of view themselves remain that of the characters. NW, therefore, 

has more in common with the Modernist novels than the omniscient perspective of White Teeth. NW 

would not be classified as a maximalist novel. As a result, any intersemioticity or diegetic exuberance 

is justified as being the voice of the character. Smith’s reduced omniscience and interconnectedness in 

NW suggests a stylistic return to the Modernist novel in order to both account for the birth of the 

reader(s) without resorting to excess or cliché. While a text such as NW rejects Johnston’s assertion 

that the literary form must be ‘machinic’, it contains characters who are capable of interacting with 

such information systems. It therefore remains both contemporary (i.e., of the networked/digital age) 

and human. 

 

A Light Encyclopedic Mode 

	

10	

	

	

Ercolino argues that a key element in defining the maximalist novel is an ‘encyclopedic mode.’ 

Encyclopedism is not the ambition of the maximalist novelist, rather it is a tool in ‘attempting to 

satisfy its synthetic ambition’ (40). Ercolino cites Italo Calvino, crediting him with pointing out that 

the desire to write encyclopedic works was one of the strongest aspirations of modernism (27). In Six 

Memos for the Next Millennium, Calvino (1988) addresses the encyclopedic under his lecture on 

multiplicity. Calvino’s own later novels reflect this value. What is not present in the later novels of 

Calvino, however, is a sense of Chekhovian/lyrical realism. Even in a novel such as If on a winter’s 

night a traveler, where particular chapters display a sense of realism, it is framed and presented as a 

construct.  

 

As well as a less forced interconnectedness, Smith expresses a predilection for ‘controlled 

little gasps of prose, as opposed to the baggy novel’ and an admiration for these qualities in the works 

of Kafka, Borges, and Cortázar. Smith goes on to ask, if it is ‘this reverence, this care, this 

suppression of ego that Wood wants to see from us?’ This reverence is shown in NW, but is taken a 

step further in Smith’s The Embassy of Cambodia (2013). Smith still interweaves particularities, but 

reduces this density so as to lighten the amount of reality imposed on her characters and the text. In 

other words, The Embassy of Cambodia depicts Chekhovian realism. 

This opposes Ercolino’s first element: length. Smith’s rejection of length, however, does not 

necessarily reject the core ambitions of the maximalist novel, as it does not necessitate a reversion to 

literary minimalism. Smith still interweaves particularities, but reduces this density so as to lighten the 

amount of reality imposed on her characters and the text. Plots do not converge at a central apex; 

rather, the plot leaves the protagonist unemployed with a wholly unclear future. Smith’s predilection 

could therefore be regarded as a desire for what Calvino labels lightness. For Calvino, lightness is 

understood in terms of its binary opposite, weight. His reason for treasuring lightness is a desire to 

write in such a way as to represent his own time, to identify himself with the collective and individual 

energies propelling the events of the century. The weight of all these issues, however, becomes 

problematic when attempting to write cohesive, dramatic, engaging fiction. As Ercolino points out, 

the problem with the encyclopedic project in the postmodern is that it ‘explodes, crushed by its own 

	

11	

	

	

weight’ (29). Borrowing from Greek mythology, Calvino compares this type of weighty text to the 

stare of the Medusa in that it paralyses language and narrative. This, however, is not to suggest that a 

writer should ignore the weight of the world. Though binary opposites enable Calvino to define his 

values, this does not necessitate the negation of the binary opposite. Like Perseus, who decapitated the 

Medusa and carried its head, the writer should be light without negating or neglecting weight.  

Miller (in Dawson) argues that the rise of the maximalist/hysterical realist movement was in 

fact a shift in American fiction away from minimalism, ‘exemplified in the tradition from Hemingway 

to Carver’ (162), to maximalism. Smith’s The Embassy of Cambodia therefore is not simply a return 

to literary minimalism, but a move beyond maximalism in that it retains the ambition of the 

maximalist novel while shedding length/weight.  

Smith’s NW and The Embassy of Cambodia suggest that while depicting interconnectivity is 

possible and even potentially persuasive, it is not a vital revelation. In the case of NW, while the 

stories are interconnected, this is primarily to justify its structure as a novel. In fact, The Embassy of 

Cambodia, with its Willesden setting, reads almost as an NW offcut. This brings into question the 

necessity for the ‘lyrical realist’ novel as an appropriate form to depict contemporary culture, and 

whether or not it will persist for reasons other than tradition or money.  

 

The Perfect Democracy 

This practice-led research takes as its subject the entire population of contemporary Australia. It is 

also about the impossibility of representing this in a work of fiction. Visible images of Australian 

currency have therefore been used as a requisite structural device to remove weight by representing 

the whole society from the richest to the poorest in the quickest way possible. A multitude of 

simultaneous writing formats (palimpsestic writing, columns, 3D shapes, etc.) and voices (wills, 

business plans, legal transcripts, stream-of-consciousness, etc.) are used to precisely depict 

characterisation. The whole work forms a ‘border-like’ shape that interconnects everything literally, 

persuasively, and diegetically.  

	

12	

	

	

In the contemporary hyper-interconnected pandemic context, it would appear that we need the 

maximalist novel more than ever. At the same time, the incompatibilities articulated above are all the 

more prominent. Through this practice-led research project, I hope to show how the incompatibilities 

of the contemporary novel can be resolved in new electronic literary forms that push beyond literary 

maximalism. 

 

	

13	

	

	

Works Cited 

Bolaño, Roberto. 2666, translated by Natasha Wimmer. London: Picador, 2009. 

Bloom, Harold. Thomas Pynchon. New York: Chelsea House Publishers, 1986. 

Calvino, Italo. If on a winter’s night a traveler. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1981. 

--. Invisible Cities. London: Pan Books, 1979. 

--. Six Memos for The Next Millennium. London: Vintage, 1988. 

Dawson, Paul. The Return of the Omniscient Narrator: Authorship and Authority in Twenty-First 

Century Fiction. Columbus: The Ohio State Univ. Press, 2013. 

DeLillo, Don. Underworld. New York: Scribner, 1997. 

DePietro, Thomas. Conversations with Don DeLillo. Jackson: Univ. of Mississippi, 2005. 

Ercolino, Stefano. The Maximalist Novel: From Thomas Pynchon’s Gravity’s Rainbow to Roberto 

Bolaño’s 2666. New York: Bloomsbury, 2014. 

Esty, Jed. “Realism Wars.” Novel 49, no.2 (2016): 316-342. 

Franzen, Jonathan. The Corrections. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2001. 

--. How to Be Alone. New York: HarperCollins, 2002. 

Hayles, N. Katharine. “Maxing Out the Novel”. Novel 49, no.3 (2016): 519-522. 

Johnston, John. Information Multiplicity: American Fiction in the Age of Media Saturation. The Johns 

Hopkins University Press: Baltimore, 1998. 

Kafka, Franz. Amerika, translated by Edwain Muir. New York: Shocken Books, 1974. 

--. Amerika (The Man Who Disappeared), translated by Michael Hofmann. London: Penguin Books, 

1996. 

	

14	

	

	

Klenemeier, M. ‘Unser Teil der Traurigkeit’. Neue Zürcher Zeitung, 27 April. 

https://www.nzz.ch/article7ZAC8-1.388933, 2002. 

Rushdie, Salman. Step Across This Line: Collected Nonfiction 1992-2002. New York: Modern 

Library, 2003. 

Smith, Zadie. “This is how it feels to me.” The Guardian, 2001. 

https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/oct/13/fiction.afghanistan. 

--. White Teeth. New York: Vintage International, 2001. 

--. Changing My Mind: Occasional Essays. London: Hamish Hamilton, 2009. 

--. NW. London: Hamish Hamilton, 2012. 

--. The Embassy of Cambodia. London: Hamish Hamilton, 2013. 

The Concise Oxford Companion to English Literature, edited by Margaret Drabble, Jenny Stringer, 

and Daniel Hahn. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 2007. 

Wallace, David Foster. (2007) Consider the Lobster and other essays, New York: Back Bay 

Books/Little Brown and Co.  

Wood, James. “Human, All Too Inhuman.” The New Republic Online, 2000. 

https://newrepublic.com/article/61361/human-inhuman. 

--. The Broken Estate: Essays on Literature and Belief. New York: Picador, 2000. 

--. “What the Dickens” The Guardian, 2001. 

https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/nov/09/fiction.reviews. 

--. How Fiction Works. New York: Picador, 2008. 

	

15	

