The Paradox of Electronic Literature in the Classroom: The
Challenges for New Literacy Practices within the Platformized

School

Michael Schlauch

Free University of Bolzano

michael.schlauch@education.unibz.it

Abstract

Reviewing the history of computing, the educational potential of new ways of knowledge representa-
tion and new literary affordances have sparked many inﬂuential ideas and reform efforts, spanning
from “frantic systems” (Nelson, 1970) to constructionist discovery learning (Papert, 1993) to the
reconﬁguration of literary education (Landow, 2006, ch. 7). Yet, the current usages of electronic
literature in education arguably fall behind those early anticipations. Therefore, this paper explores
the wider educational and social entanglements that withhold electronic literature from entering
classrooms in the context of current technology transformations. Considering the recent pandemic-
related global upsurge of the digitalization of educational systems, the mere lack of supply of digital
devices and equipment will cease to be the main obstacle for the adoption of electronic literature
in K12 classrooms. Nonetheless, the question shifts to what imaginaries and discourses shape
(and limit) the use of new digital literary affordances. Reviewing current trends, three issues are
identiﬁed. These concern (1) ﬁxations of technological disruption, (2) literacy learning objectives
and (3) the marginalization of teaching. The focus on technological disruption (and solutionism)
refers to a tendency for innovators to overly emphasize particular technological aspects and to
become ﬁxated on their “disruptive” beneﬁts while disregarding the need for cultural and artistic
conventions and communities of education practices to grow within the digital medium. Secondly,
the problematization of learning objectives relates to a prioritization of basic skills and 21st century
workforce preparation while neglecting the need to address new critical literacy practices. Rather
than responding with a restricted, preservationist stance limited to paper-based literacy, educators
and authors may ﬁnd ways of combining material affordances and electronic literature to introduce
wider literacy conceptions in educational practice. In a similar vein, the marginalization of teaching
is concerned with how technology is being used to quantify, classify and control teaching practices
within new regimes of digital governance. In other words, teachers are being increasingly framed
as technicians and behavioral managers in place of enhancing their role as “cyberbards” (Murray,
2016). Given that some of the issues raised correspond to known problems in the ﬁeld of electronic
literature, they also provide opportunities for further transdisciplinary research into the production
and adaptation of electronic literature for educational purposes.

1 Introduction: E-lit as educational media

As has been remarked in a recent UN-report, a substantial part of digital educational media pro-
posed by publishers are continuations of paper textbooks. At the same time a “plausible deﬁnition
does not seem to exist” and digital textbooks are often just considered as “electronic versions of tra-
ditional print textbooks” (Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Education for Peace and Sustainable Devel-
opment [UNESCO MGIEP], 2019, p. 32). While the speciﬁc reasons for the limited use of interactive

1

features and affordances of the digital medium in K12 education are not sufﬁciently investigated, re-
search on electronic literature is able to help clarify the underlying problems by conceptualizing the
distinctions between traditional educational media and the new type of literary works made possible
by computational media. Hayles (2008, p. 3) refers to “electronic literature” as “digital born”, i.e.
“a ﬁrst-generation digital object created on a computer”.
In a more extensive deﬁnition electronic
literature is described as a “work with an important literary aspect that takes advantage of the ca-
pabilities and contexts provided by the stand-alone or networked computer” (Hayles, 2008, p. 3).
Hayles (2008, p. 4) acknowledges that this deﬁnition is still entangled with expectations of print
conventions and print literary modes, but electronic literature remains distinct in that it is “performed
by properly executed code”. A key notion expressed by this is that a work of electronic literature is
always dependent on sociotechnical systems, commonly labeled “platforms”, that are necessary to
afford those performances. This is especially the case with “third generation” works of electronic
literature that circulate within well established platforms and social networks (Flores, 2019). While
it has been noted that print literature is also contingent on particular inventions, social conventions
and literacy (Borsuk, 2018), the platform aspect of electronic literature introduces new issues of de-
sign, prescribed usage, compatibility, economic feasibility and equity that inﬂuence how electronic
artifacts are developed, made and used for educational purposes.

Early ideas about educational uses of digital artifacts span from feeled-effect systems (“fantics”)
consisting of stretchtexts, hypertexts, hypergrams and other hypermedia (Nelson, 2003) to visions
of constructionist discovery learning (Papert, 1993) and to the reconﬁguration of literary education
(Landow, 2006, ch. 7). Yet, if we understand “genre” as something driven by cultural and tech-
nological contexts (Rettberg, 2018), up until now no distinct “genre” has developed within or out
of the educational realm. What is more, reading researchers such as (Mangen & van der Weel,
2017, p. 10) take the marginal role of hypertext novels as an indicator for a “failed paradigm” which
allegedly ignores cognitive information processing and the evolutionary need for a “hierarchical re-
lationship between author and a receptive, passive reader”. While it is not necessary to agree with
this statement, this type of controversy however raises the question of whether the success of a
form of electronic literature is determined by cognitive aspects alone. Arguably, another important
issue is connected to electronic literature being constrained by underlying sociotechnical contin-
gencies and platforms, which leads us to the main question this article addresses. Thus, from a
platform perspective, what are possible obstacles to the entrance of electronic literature into the mix
of educational media used in K12 education?

2 Platforms and platformization

During the COVID19-related switches to emergency remote teaching on a global scale, recent de-
bates have concentrated on the “platforms” offered by the major ed-tech players. In the context of
this conference, however, the notion of platform also addresses the technical foundations for forms
and communities of electronic literature to emerge. This indicates a need to deﬁne of the platform
concept as it is interpreted by speciﬁc research strands that are different from everyday language.
Within platform studies, Bogost and Montfort (2009) understand platform as a computational plat-
form on which digital media work is based. They echo Marc Andreessen in deﬁning a platform as
a:

“a system that can be reprogrammed and therefore customized by outside develop-
ers—users—and in that way, adapted to countless needs and niches that the platform’s
original developers could not have possibly contemplated, much less had time to ac-
commodate.”

On the other side, those who study the current technological transformations of the educational
sector from a critical and sociological perspective also have been ﬁnding ways to account for the

2

increasing role of code and information processing. In an editorial dedicated to these issues, De-
cuypere et al. (2021) reintroduce the deﬁnition of platforms proposed by van Dijck et al. (2018):

“An online ‘platform’ is a programmable digital architecture designed to organize interac-
tions between users – not just end users but also corporate entities and public bodies.
It is geared toward the systematic collection, algorithmic processing, circulation, and
monetization of user data.”

Both deﬁnitions do not necessarily contradict each other. Rather, they emphasize different as-
pects of what platforms are. While the ﬁrst deﬁnition highlights the adaptability of platforms to count-
less needs and niches that are unanticipated by the developers, the second deﬁnition acknowledges
that many of those unanticipated uses are nevertheless embedded in larger socioeconomic frames
and power dynamics. Baring this in mind, a major concern with the trend of “platformization” (Sr-
nicek, 2017) is how the educational sector as a whole has increasingly become “programmable”
through technological infrastructure with implications on a pedagogical and social level that are oth-
erwise neglected. As such, educational platforms act as “as connective artifacts constitutive of, as
well as constituted by, active socio-technical assemblages that are in the process of signiﬁcantly
transforming the educational sector” (Decuypere et al., 2021, p. 2).

With this perspective, it still not clear whether current iterations of digital educational platforms
actually promote or continue to marginalize literary engagement with digital-born artifacts. One of
the concerns is that platforms often reproduce the kinds of classroom conﬁgurations and pedago-
gies that have been inscribed into traditional education for the past century. As Perrotta et al. (2020)
observe with reference to Google Classroom, “the tried and tested mechanisms and structures of
formal schooling (classrooms, course work, student submissions and the asymmetrical relationship
between teachers and students) are abstracted into a predeﬁned template for participation.” Thus,
with a differentiated look at education as a platform, platform is intended not as a monolithic struc-
ture but as “ecologies of practices” where different forces, values and movements come together
(Decuypere et al., 2021, p. 8). This enables us to examine resulting paradoxes and ambiguities.
For example, efforts to “disrupt” education may also prevent practices and literacy conceptions from
changing.
In speciﬁc, it is useful to look at these issues from the perspective of school reform,
literacy conceptions and the role of teaching.

2.1 Disruptive ﬁxations

It is easy to write off early ideas about electronic educational media and literature as examples
of utopianism that prospected the possibility of social change simply by redeﬁning the relationship
between the author and the reader. Yet, there is a distinction between the kind of technological
solutionism that has been associated with various edtech products (Teräs et al., 2020) and techno-
logical idealism connected to ideas about constructivist learning. In fact, much of original thinking
about interactive digital narrative stems from an urge to go beyond the conception of computers as
a “workhorse” for “drill and practice teaching” (Murray, 2016, p. 6).

Ethnographic studies such as Sims (2017) provide a more nuanced insight into the drawbacks
of visionary ideas as they are applied to real-world contexts. He argues that processes of school
reform often traverse “cycles of disruptive ﬁxations”. Such cycles start with a phase of “problema-
tization and rendering technical”, when experts and allies imagine and represent ﬁgured worlds
that are particularly amenable to and controllable with envisioned remedies (Sims, 2017, p. 58).
These processes of problematization and rendering technical, however, also produce ﬁxations that
exclude many factors that introduce unanticipated problems in practice.
In other words, “unantic-
ipated forces overﬂow the project and destabilize reformers’ carefully designed activities” (Sims,
2017, p. 55). Overﬂowing, if identiﬁed and dealt with carefully, can provide a valuable occasion
to question underlying assumptions and stereotypes. But, as Sims (2017, p. 97) points out, it is
then far more common to quickly search “for [conventional] resources that would stabilize the project

3

against the unanticipated turbulence of students’ unsanctioned behavior”. Ames (2018) identiﬁes as
typical computer-centric assumptions in constructionism the tendency to emphasize learning as an
individualistic process and the belief that computers and technical devices will “naturally captivate
children”, resulting in the claim of pure discovery learning which is rarely achieved in practice.

Further research questions may consider how these dilemmas can be used to question the as-
sumptions that are made as new platforms for electronic literature are developed. A crucial issue
at the intersection of platform studies and education, for example, concerns how prospective cre-
ators and contributors are to be involved as participants in ways that are more open, equitable and
inclusive without producing further idealizations or ﬁxations.

2.2 Literacy limitations

Part of the neglect of educational forms of electronic literature is related to the type of literacy
schools are expected to promote among children. If the notion of “literacy” as a main educational
objective has remained static over the past decades, there would be no need for educational media
other than print-based works that precede electronic literature. From a new literacies and multi-
literacies perspective, this basic literacy idea, understood as simply as reading and writing, was
“appropriate for a society that expected its workers to be passively disciplined” in the context of past
industrial economies (Cope & Kalantzis, 2009, p. 169). The activity of “reading”, however, is subject
to change within contemporary media environments. Young people are “content with being no less
than actors rather than audiences, players rather than spectators, agents rather than voyeurs and
users rather than readers of narrative” (Cope & Kalantzis, 2009, p. 173). Instead of reading, it is
possible to refer to activities such as to “interact” with or to “play” through a digital literary artifact.
Nevertheless, those terms may be used in a ways that overlook the literacy portion needed to en-
gage in those kinds of meaning making, implying an inherent ability of the “digital native” to interact
and play naturally with any kind of media. Educational forms of electronic literature may thus be
recognized as valuable resources for the promotion of a broadened notion of literacy. In this case,
literacy teaching, rather than focusing on skills and competence, would aim “at creating a kind of
person, an active designer of meaning, with a sensibility open to differences, change and innova-
tion” (Cope & Kalantzis, 2009).
In speciﬁc, Burnett and Merchant (2015) propose to restate the
principles of literacy education as a consequence of these contemporary educational challenges.
Accompanied by future electronic literary forms, literacy education should, for example, promote
collaboration around and through texts and artifacts, acknowledge the role of multimodality, the af-
fective embodied and material dimensions of meaning-making as well as the changing nature of
meaning making (Burnett & Merchant, 2015, pp. 272-273). There is a tendency for processes
of platformization to prescribe speciﬁc version of literacy as universal. Therefore, it is crucial to
seek ways for platform cultures to evolve from collective practices of meaning making, rather than
predetermining them.

2.3 Neglecting teaching

Biesta (2012) admonishes that there is a ﬂattening of educational discourse which neglects “crucial
educational questions about content, purpose and relationships”. He refers to this trend as “learni-
ﬁcation”.
In other words, teaching is often reduced to matters of control, which substantiates a
simplistic opposition between teacher-centered and student-centered pedagogy. As critics note, old
and new edtech promises are often accompanied by the portrayal of personalized (individualized)
learning solutions as student-centric and transformative (Facer & Selwyn, 2021). Yet, issues of data
collection, control and surveillance are often the other side of the medal (Jarke & Breiter, 2019).
Even before the entrance of computers in schools, there has already been an extensive debate
on educational media such as standardized textbooks and their potential role in deskilling teachers
while also imposing cultural imaginaries (Apple, 1992). A similar tendency can be found by exam-

4

ining original technology conceptions. For example, the “teaching” in teaching machines, as they
have been conceived by Skinner (1968, p. 79), consisted in “the arrangement of contingencies of
reinforcement under which students learn”. According to Watters (2021) similar assumptions about
teaching have persisted throughout the history of educational technology. From this perspective,
learniﬁcation signiﬁes the mechanization of teaching through technological means, without neces-
sarily augmenting the agency of students and learners. A departure from learniﬁcation, on the other
side, would aim at conferring new agency to students and teachers. With regard to electronic liter-
ature, there are different ways in which teaching can be ampliﬁed, rather than limiting or deskilling
teachers. While in the past good teachers have been described as storytellers that are competent in
conﬁguring ﬂexible assemblages of learning, the ﬁeld of electronic literature may support teachers
with notions such as “procedural authority” (Murray, 2016, p. 346) that transcend the binarism be-
tween learner-centric freedom and teacher-centric control. As a result, platforms in conjunction with
efforts in teacher education should support teachers in partially becoming “cyberbards” themselves
(Murray, 2016, ch. 7).

3 Conclusions

While it is impractical to predict forms of electronic literature that may thrive within contexts of formal
education at this point, this contribution outlines some issues that are relevant when assessing cur-
rent platform cultures. Thinking of educational platforms as connected socio-technical assemblages
helps clarify some of the obstacles to the entrance of electronic literature in K12 education. Those
obstacles concern the unreﬂected recourse to disruptive ﬁxations, limiting literacy conceptions and
teachers and students whose agency is undermined in processes of learniﬁcation. Platforms can
emerge from, but also contribute in stabilizing these circumstances. While current educational
platforms are intertwined with data-based commercial interests, it is however possible to conceive
future educational assemblages as platforms that provide spaces for electronic literature depending
on different sets of assumptions that are to be made.

Works cited

Ames, M. G. (2018). Hackers, computers, and cooperation: A critical history of logo and construc-
tionist learning. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 2(CSCW), 1–
19.

Apple, M. W. (1992). The text and cultural politics. Educational Researcher, 21(7), 4–19. https :

//doi.org/10.3102/0013189x021007004

Biesta, G. J. (2012). Giving teaching back to education: Responding to the disappearance of the

teacher. Phenomenology & Practice, 6(2), 35–49. https://doi.org/10.29173/pandpr19860

Bogost, I., & Montfort, N. (2009). Platform studies: Frequently questioned answers. UC Irvine: Digital

Arts; Culture 2009. https://escholarship.org/uc/item/01r0k9br

Borsuk, A. (2018). The book. MIT Press.
Burnett, C., & Merchant, G. (2015). The challenge of 21st-century literacies. Journal of Adolescent

& Adult Literacy, 59(3), 271–274. https://doi.org/10.1002/jaal.482

Cope, B., & Kalantzis, M. (2009).

multiliteracies”: New literacies, new learning. Pedagogies: An International Journal, 4(3),
164–195. https://doi.org/10.1080/15544800903076044

Decuypere, M., Grimaldi, E., & Landri, P. (2021). Introduction: Critical studies of digital education
platforms. Critical Studies in Education, 62(1), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1080/17508487.
2020.1866050

Facer, K., & Selwyn, N. (2021). Digital technology and the futures of education – towards ‘non-stupid’
optimism. Paper commissioned for the UNESCO Futures of Education report (forthcoming).

5

Flores, L. (2019). Third generation electronic literature. Electronic book review, 7.
Hayles, N. K. (2008). Electronic literature: New horizons for the literary. University of Notre Dame

Press.

Jarke, J., & Breiter, A. (2019). Editorial: The dataﬁcation of education. Learning, Media and Tech-

nology, 44(1), 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1080/17439884.2019.1573833

Landow, G. P. (2006). Hypertext 3.0: Critical theory and new media in an era of globalization. JHU

Press.

Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Education for Peace and Sustainable Development. (2019). Rethinking
pedagogy: Exploring the potential of digital technology in achieving quality education (tech.
rep.). Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Education for Peace and Sustainable Development.

Mangen, A., & van der Weel, A. (2017). Why don’t we read hypertext novels? Convergence: The
International Journal of Research into New Media Technologies, 23(2), 166–181. https :
//doi.org/10.1177/1354856515586042

Murray, J. H. (2016). Hamlet on the holodeck: The future of narrative in cyberspace (2nd ed.). New

York, The Free Press.

Nelson, T. H. (1970). No more teachers’ dirty looks. Computer decisions, 9(8), 16–23.
Nelson, T. H. (2003). From computer lib/dream machines, 1974. In N. Montfort & N. Wardrip-Fruin

(Eds.), The new media reader. MIT press.

Papert, S. (1993). The children’s machine: Rethinking school in the age of the computer. New York,

Basic Books.

Perrotta, C., Gulson, K. N., Williamson, B., & Witzenberger, K. (2020). Automation, APIs and the
distributed labour of platform pedagogies in google classroom. Critical Studies in Education,
1–17. https://doi.org/10.1080/17508487.2020.1855597

Rettberg, S. (2018). Electronic literature. John Wiley & Sons.
Sims, C. (2017). Disruptive ﬁxation: School reform and the pitfalls of techno-idealism. Princeton

University Press.

Skinner, B. (1968). The technology of teaching. New York, Appleton.
Srnicek, N. (2017). Platform capitalism. John Wiley & Sons.
Teräs, M., Suoranta, J., Teräs, H., & Curcher, M. (2020). Post-covid-19 education and education
technology ‘solutionism’: A seller’s market. Postdigital Science and Education. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s42438-020-00164-x

van Dijck, J., Poell, T., & de Waal, M. (2018). The platform society. Oxford University Press. https:

//doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780190889760.001.0001

Watters, A. (2021). Teaching machines. MIT Press.

6

