Motivating Struggling Readers to Mentally 

“Show Up” with Wonder Stories

 
  
  
  

 

Elliott Hedman 

mPath 

Denver, USA 

hedman@media.mit.edu 

 

    
 

ABSTRACT 

In the United States, a student in the 20th percentile 

reads books for 0.7 minutes per day, while a student in the 
98th percentile reads 65 minutes per day (Cunningham & 
Stanovich, 1998). For the last four years, with 300 children 
from Title 1 schools and the Boys & Girls Club, we 
researched how to create digital texts that better cognitively 
engage struggling readers using psychophysiological 
sensors, eye tracking, and co-creation. 

This research led to the creation of Wonder Stories. 
Wonder Stories’ texts motivate students to critically think 
by immersing students in frequent, story-based questions. 
As a response to children’s low motivations during COVID-
19, we added a social competition to Wonder Stories – 
answering questions correctly gave points in a trivia-like 
game. 

When struggling readers were given Wonder Stories, 
students mentally showed up: their participation increased, 
readers were more cognitively engaged with the material, 
and students were critically thinking about the text more 
often. This study suggests that interactive, question-based 
reading shows great promise to increasing children’s 
participation and engagement in middle-grade reading. 

 

I.  CHALLENGE 

It requires extensive practice to become skilled at an 
activity (Allington, 2009, 2014), putting struggling readers 
at a disadvantage with their lack of reading hours. 
According to the National Reading Panel, “Literally 
hundreds of correlational studies find that the best readers 
read the most and the poor readers read the least. These 
correlational studies suggest that the more children read, the 
better their fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension” (2000, 
p.12). Correspondingly, another strong predictor of reading 
scores is a child’s engagement with reading. Reading 
engagement is more influential than gender, income, or 
ethnicity (Cox & Guthrie, 2001).  

The Boys & Girls Club of Metro Denver faced the 

challenge that many of their students were not reading at all 
when they came back to the club in the middle of COVID-

ELO 2021 Conference and Festival: Platform (Post?) Pandemic, May 26-28 
 

19. After more than six months of not being in school, the 
students were actively resisting reading activities. 

A.  Defining “showing up” 

When a student shows up to reading, they have a will 

to learn (Covington, 1998). Students are excited and curious 
to start reading. The student is open to difficult challenges. 
A student who shows up cognitively engages with the task 
set before them. 

A student who does not “show up” chooses not to 

participate if given the option. When asked to do a task, they 
will actively resist, do nothing, or participate minimally. In 
our reading setting, participating minimally often meant 
skipping texts and answering questions without thinking. 

 

B.  Students were not mentally showing up to read 

For the last four years, Dr. Elliott Hedman has been a 
researcher in residence at the Boys & Girls Club of Metro 
Denver. There, 19.5% of students are African American and 
64.5% of students are Hispanic (Omni Institute, 2015). Most 
of these students attend Title 1 schools and are one to two 
grade levels below reading. 

With COVID-19, the Denver Public Schools closed 

down, but the Boys & Girls Club was considered essential 
and opened in August 2020. In addition to the research Dr. 
Hedman was doing, he was invited to be the new literacy 
teacher for the opened club. 

While many teachers were struggling to motivate kids 
to physically show up to Zoom meetings, the Boys & Girls 
Club had a different problem – students were not mentally 
showing up in the classroom. 

“Reading sucks.” Those were the first words second-

grade student Emanuel told Dr. Hedman as he came back to 
the Vickers Boys & Girls Club. 

When Dr. Hedman pulled up the first reading 

assignment, third-grade student Adonis actively pushed 
against participation. He told the class he did not want to 
read. Others echoed Adonis’s attitude. The social worker 
came in to help settle things down. 

On that same day, Dr. Hedman worked with the fifth- 

and sixth-grade students. When he told the students they 

Denver and Title 1 schools, exploring how to make digital 
reading a more engaging experience. For this year, with 
reduced class sizes due to COVID-19, we worked with a 
smaller set of 50 students. 

We asked participating students to read digital 

prototypes. We observed children’s behaviors with both 
screen recording and digital eye tracking (Tobii Technology 
AB, Sweden). In some cases (before COVID-19), we asked 
readers to wear psychophysiological sensors to monitor their 
emotional engagement (see Hedman, 2014). 

After each session, we interviewed children about their 

reading experience and how the experience could be 
improved. 

We used a design-based research method to improve 
students’ motivation (Cobb et al., 2003). Based on student 
feedback, we would make improvements to the reading app 
and show students the updated version the following week. 
Through the four years, this reading prototype has been 
iterated on over 60 times, and we are still iterating on it. 

With COVID-19, our research methodology was 

modified. Since Dr. Hedman was teaching reading to the 
Boys & Girls Club, interviews were done in class and 
observations were made live. Iterations were still done to the 
product, but changes were made primarily to help children 
better “show up” to their reading lessons. 

A.  Description of intervention 

Below is a description of the most recent reading 

intervention we used during most of COVID-19. 

Wonder Stories are short stories that are approximately 

300 words in length. Each page has one to three sentences. 
Stories are presented as mysteries with “big problems.” The 
major difference between typical stories and Wonder Stories 
is that there are many questions interspersed throughout the 
text, typically around seven questions in a 300-word story. 
These questions are critical to the plot and require deduction 
and inferential thinking. For example, “Dr. Llama can’t see 
anything because she is _______ (too far away)” or “To 
help Glomper, Dr. Llama brings back _______ 
(binoculars).” 
 

were going to read, their eyes drifted back to their cell 
phones and computer games, ignoring him. Only one fifth-
grade student read with him that first day back. 

While students were physically back in the Boys & 

Girls Club, they were not ready to engage with reading and 
actively resisted reading any text. 

C.  Students were removed from a culture of daily reading 

Many students had likely not read a book all year. 

They may not have books at home (Luo et al., 2020) and 
spent less than 1 minute per day reading (Cunningham & 
Stanovich, 1998).  

D.  Book donatitions did not change the reading culture 

While at the club, Dr. Hedman brought over 100 of his 

own middle-grade books, with popular titles such as Diary 
of a Wimpy Kid and Dog Man. Throughout the course of the 
year, none of those books were read; all stayed in the 
storage bin. 

The Boys & Girls Club also received a large donation 

of hundreds of new books with diverse main characters 
during COVID-19. Those books sat on the pool table unread 
as well. The high school students received a collection of 
the first book in the Harry Potter series, which never left the 
plastic wrapping. Access to physical books by itself did not 
solve the “showing up” problem, as reading was not 
motivating. 
 

E.  Addressing the “showing up” problem 

While there is literature on the importance of motivation, 

research on how to motivate students in reading is still 
lacking (Guthrie, 2004). Providing texts students are 
interested in (Cox & Guthrie, 2001) and providing students 
choice (Worthy & McKool, 1996) are two main strategies 
for engaging readers. Top digital reading tools today 
emphasize the abundance of literature students can choose 
from: Epic’s front page announces it has 40,000 books, 
myON has 6,000. With this many books, students are given 
an abundance of choice and books within their interests. 
Yet, like Harry Potter in plastic wrap, for many students, 
having access to books of interest is not enough to motivate 
them to “show up” and become engaged readers.  

Our research and co-creation went beyond choice and 

topic. How could we redesign the actual experience of 
reading to motivate children? 

In the last six months, we worked with 50 students, 
most of them behind in reading, not wanting to show up. 
This lack of motivation was likely due, in part, to students 
not having exposure to physical book reading for more than 
six months. When schools once again open in person, we 
believe other teachers will experience our same challenge of 
students not wanting to “show up” to reading. 
 

II.  METHODS 

Over the last four years, we have conducted research 

with over 300 kids at the Boys & Girls Club of Metro 

Fig. 1: Example of Wonder Story format 

 

ELO 2021 Conference and Festival: Platform (Post?) Pandemic, May 26-28 
 

 

Partway through our research during COVID-19, we 

B.  Increased academic engagement 

noticed that some children were resistant to reading even 
with interactive text. We created new prototypes to add in 
social motivators to Wonder Stories. 

For our early prototypes, we integrated Wonder Stories 

with Kahoot! In Kahoot!, when children answer questions 
correctly, they receive points and are ranked against one 
another. We tied Kahoot! points to each question as children 
read.  

You can download and view our Wonder Stories app 

at www.wonderstories.app. 

 
You can see an example of the Kahoot! and Wonder 

Story prototype here: 

 
https://create.kahoot.it/share/glomper-goes-to-the-

dentist/3c213a63-8766-4d95-becb-2a4e8756c950 

 
You can access all of our Kahoot! prototypes by 
looking for the username “WonderStory” in Kahoot! 

 
 
Throughout the year, students read 60 different 

Wonder Stories. Kindergarten to third-grade students read as 
a group, taking turns reading off of the projector. The 
fourth-grade students alternated reading as a group and 
individually, and the sixth- and seventh-graders read 
individually. Reading material was at a second- to fourth-
grade reading level.  

Depending on the homeroom teacher, some classes 

offered a prize for the first- and second-place students. The 
fifth- and sixth-grade students’ performance was tied to 
Classcraft rewards. 

 

III.  RESULTS 

A.  Increased academic participation 

Within three weeks, all students were reading Wonder 
Stories daily, without protest (except for two, which we will 
discuss later). Some students began asking the teacher in the 
hallway, “When are we going to play Wonder Stories 
again?” Other students asked to read another story after the 
30-minute reading period was over. Students would already 
be logged into Kahoot! ready to play before Dr. Hedman 
arrived at the classroom. On three separate occasions, 
parents came to pick up students and the students asked their 
parents to wait so they could finish Wonder Stories. 

Wonder Stories worked particularly well for children 

who struggled with reading in school. As the fifth-grade 
student Davies said in class, “I don’t know what it is, but 
normally during school I just drift off. But with Wonder 
Stories, it is really easy for me to pay attention.” 

With Wonder Stories, we started with students who 
hated reading and created a way to encourage students to 
mentally show up and participate. 

ELO 2021 Conference and Festival: Platform (Post?) Pandemic, May 26-28 
 

In addition to observing children participating, we 
observed an increased level of academic engagement as 
well. Typically during reading questions, observed students 
do not put effort into their tasks. During the Accelerated 
Reading STAR test that students are required to take each 
semester, we observed most students randomly selecting 
answers and skipping reading – the test had no meaning for 
them, and they did not “show up.” 

The competition feature added importance to each 

question in Wonder Stories. Consequentially, students cared 
about comprehension and answering correctly. Students 
asked the teacher or one another for “hints” on questions. 
When students answered questions correctly, there was 
often a verbal celebration or a fist pump. Sometimes 
students would restart the reading assignment once they 
answered a few questions wrong. 

One particularly struggling fifth-grade student, 

Kaseem, asked if he could read with the teacher or the top 
student to make sure he got every question right. 

When a correct answer felt wrong, students would 

point it out and argue with the teacher why they felt it was 
correct: “There is no way you can put a costume on a fish!” 

 In addition, Wonder Stories made it easier to help 

students. Dr. Hedman would tell struggling students, “Let 
me read with you. I want to make sure you get the next 
question right.”  

Similarly, some struggling readers were in the habit of 

skipping past all of the text, a behavior we have observed 
many times with eye tracking. We were able to tell these 
fast readers, “If you skip past the text, it is going to be really 
hard to get the question right,” making the conversation 
more positive and helpful. 

Students not only participated in reading but were 

cognitively engaged with the texts they were reading, 
working hard to comprehend the text. 

C.  Increased comprehension and critical thinking skills 

The goal of teaching reading is not only to help children 
with phonics and fluency but build their higher-level skill of 
comprehension as well (Oakhill & Cain, 2007). Wonder 
Stories includes a comprehension question about every 40 
words. Children are asked to make a model of what they 
read and make an inference based off of that model. This 
inference-making is regarded as a high-level skill (Kintsch, 
1994) that often is not developed until third grade (Paris & 
Lindauer, 1976; Paris, Lindauer, & Cox, 1977). But with 
Wonder Stories, inferential questions are part of the process 
for all grades. The ability to make inferences is a strong 
predictor of overall reading comprehension across multiple 
studies (Cain & Oakhill, 1999; Cain, Oakhill, & Elbro, 
2003; Cain, Oakhill, & Lemmon, 2004). 

The kindergarten to third-grade students often scored 
as well or better on the comprehension questions than their 
older peers, suggesting that young children were able to 
work on higher-level comprehension skills within the 
Wonder Stories setting. 

 

Table 1: Students’ comprehension scores on select stories 

Fig. 3: Skin conductance of student reading Wonder Stories 

 

 

With inquiry-based reading, children across grades 

were applying critical thinking skills and showing high 
levels of comprehension. 

D.  Questions motivate 

During our early prototypes and testing, children often 

drifted off during the reading sessions. However, when 
questions occurred, readers would become much more 
engaged and attentive. As an example, here is the 
psychophysiological data of a third-grade English language 
learner at the Boys & Girls Club reading Doctor Dolittle. 
 

Reading Wonder Stories, there is a substantial increase 

in the number of skin conductance spikes. The student 
answered every comprehension question correctly and 
reported that reading the story “was almost as fun as math.” 

In all of our research, we noticed a similar trend that 

interactive questions were a strong foundation for 
engagement and attention. Here is a zoomed-in skin 
conductance of another reader, reading a digital text with 
questions interspersed:  

 

Fig. 2: Skin conductance of a third-grade reader 

 

The above graph shows the student’s skin 

conductance, a marker of psychophysiological arousal. 
When the graph spikes up (like at the beginning), those are 
moments where the student is likely engaging. When there 
are no spikes in skin conductance, these are moments where 
the reader is likely disengaging from the text. 

In this example, the student drifted off while reading 

Doctor Dolittle for less than eight minutes. When the 
researchers ended the session, they noted a big glob of drool 
on the front page. 

During this same testing session, the student read a 

Wonder Story. 

 

ELO 2021 Conference and Festival: Platform (Post?) Pandemic, May 26-28 
 

Fig. 4: Skin conductance increases with questions 
 

 

Notice how reading itself fails to engage the reader but 

the question afterward increases his engagement 
substantially on its own. 

With our eye tracking glasses, we noticed a similar 
trend. Children would skip past the reading consistently, 
speeding to the question, but would then read the question 
multiple times. 

 

E.  Social competition enhances readers’ motivation 

While questions were a strong motivator in our one-
on-one tests, questions alone were typically not enough to 
motivate the class.  

After trying a few different modifications, children’s 

reading motivations substantially increased when we 
combined Kahoot! and Wonder Stories. When the social 
competition was added to the questions, students cared 
much more about answering correctly, an important factor 
to engagement (Hedman, Zanchi, Hedman, 2018). 

It was only after Kahoot! was integrated with Wonder 
Stories that we started to see the participation behaviors of 
asking to play more and asking for help. Previous research 
suggests that social connections can play an important role 
in motivation (see Cooc & Kim, 2017; Barron,2006; Olivera 
& Strauss, 2004). 
 

feeling like they lost. (We may be able to add better game 
mechanics in the future to address this, like double points.) 
Another benefit of shorter stories is that we are able to 

read more of them. We now typically read two to three 
stories in a 30-minute session. The new stories and restarted 
competition refresh students’ attention span. Additionally, 
having multiple stories gives more students a chance to win. 

We believe this increase in motivation is in part due to 

 

where children are developmentally in terms of defining 
success. Students need support and belief in their 
competence to gain motivation (Ryan and Deci, 200). 
Starting as early as second grade, children begin defining 
their skill level in comparison to others (Ruble et al., 1980). 
Social comparison theory posits it is difficult to see oneself 
as “good at reading” without comparing oneself to another 
person (Festinger, 1954).  

As an example, Malachi, a second-grade student, was 

one of our most reluctant readers, putting up strong 
resistance each day we taught. He refused to play Kahoot! 
or Wonder Stories at first. A few times, he did agree to play, 
and in one of those times he scored in the top three. At the 
end, he exclaimed, “I got in the top three!” This pride 
generated enthusiasm and confidence for future rounds. He 
started asking if he could read pages, so much so that we 
now are working with him on giving other children a chance 
to read out loud. After his first success, Malachi is now 
willing to read Wonder Stories with us. 

A similar story occurred with the fourth-grade student 
Athena, who often scored last in the Kahoot! game. One day 
the teacher asked to read together with Athena and helped 
her think through each question. Athena earned second that 
day and was more enthusiastic to read the following days. 

Adding a social competition to comprehension 

questions is a strong way to make correctly answering 
questions important and build reader confidence. 

 

F.  Keeping story length short sustains motivation 

Most of the Wonder Stories we read are 300 to 600 

words, designed to be read in less than 15 minutes. 
Originally, we started with longer stories that were about 
1,200 words and took 20 or more minutes to read. For many 
of the readers, these long stories took too long. Partway 
through these long stories, children would start fidgeting, 
talking with each other, or stop participating. The 
kindergarten student James would consistently tell us after 
about 300 words, “I’m going to stop reading now.” 

We started providing texts shorter than 300 words, and 

students were able to sustain attention. Readers stopped 
asking, “How many more pages?” No student has 
complained about the stories being too short. 

Social competition also created a problem for longer 

stories. Sometimes students would answer two to three 
questions wrong and know they were not going to win. In a 
short story, by the time they realize that, they only have one 
or two questions left to finish up. In the long stories, they 
may have to endure 20 or more minutes of reading, already 

ELO 2021 Conference and Festival: Platform (Post?) Pandemic, May 26-28 
 

IV.  LIMITATIONS 

A.  How can we better use social competition to enhance 

motivation? 

At the beginning of this study, social competition was 

not something we seriously considered, but it became 
increasingly important for improving motivation. We were 
limited by the scope of what Kahoot! could do and believe 
that there are many more ways of bringing competition into 
reading. 

While many of the students, especially the boys, were 

motivated by competing with their peers, others were 
intimidated by the social competition aspect. Olivia, a 
proficient first-grade reader, often asked not to play. One 
time she hid behind a plant so the teacher would not call on 
her to play. For Olivia, we believe she needed a way to 
contribute without being judged. 

Kaseem, in fifth grade, struggled with failure. As soon 
as he answered a problem wrong, he would quit, sometimes 
even acting out to the point the social worker would need to 
intervene. One day Kaseem partnered with Asha, the top 
performing reader. The partnership worked well, as Kaseem 
was able to answer all of the problems right with Asha’s 
help. 

Social competition is not always better for all students. 
Future research should look into how social competition can 
better celebrate struggling students. How can competition be 
across groups rather than within groups to better encourage 
collaboration? How can students stay engaged after getting a 
problem wrong? What other interventions work for children 
who do not like social competition? 

B.  External factors and teachers still matter 

With COVID-19, things were often in flux at the Boys 

& Girls Club. Multiple times, classes would have a new 
homeroom teacher. On new teacher days, students would 
often push boundaries more, taking out their cell phones or 
intentionally skipping through readings.  

For the fifth- and sixth-grade classes, students were 

much more likely to read and participate when prizes were 
incorporated with Classcraft. Having clear rewards and 
structures tied to getting in the “Top 3” had a strong effect. 

Future studies should take into consideration the 

external factors in reading that help increase student 
participation. While interactive reading increases 
participation and engagement, classroom structure and 
management still play an important role. 

C.  How can interactive reading enhance longer texts? 

A key strategy of our intervention was limiting reading 

to five- to 10-minute short stories. As kids progress, they 
will be expected to engage with reading for much longer 
periods. How can questions and social competition engage 
students for longer periods of time? How can interactive 
reading work for a chapter book? 

V.  CONCLUSION 

Co-creating with over 300 students across four years, 

we set out to redesign books to help readers show up to 
reading. With psychophysiological sensors, eye tracking, 
and ethnographic methods, we created Wonder Stories. 
Wonder Stories provided frequent, story-based questions; 
added social competition; and provided short stories. For 
many students who were not normally motivated to read, 
Wonder Stories did motivate them to show up to reading 
and cognitively engage. Interactive, question-based reading 
shows great promise to increase children’s participation and 
engagement in middle-grade reading. 

 

Hedman, E. (2014). Thick psychophysiology for empathic design. 
Retrieved from https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/91436 

Hedman, E., Zanchi, C., & Hedman, G. (2018). Effective Feedback 

Depends on the Emotional Weight of a Problem. In AERA 2018 
Annual Meeting. New York CIty, NY. 

Institute, O. (2015). 2014 – 2015 Evaluation of the Boys & Girls Clubs of 
Metro Denver. Denver. Retrieved from http://www.bgcmd.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/10/2014-15-BGCMD-Evaluation-Report.pdf 

Kintsch, W. (1994). Text comprehension, memory, and learning. American 

Psychologist, 49(4), 294. 

Luo, R., Tamis‐LeMonda, C. S., & Mendelsohn, A. L. (2020). Children’s 

Literacy Experiences in Low‐Income Families: The Content of 
Books Matters. Reading Research Quarterly, 55(2), 213–233. 

N. R. P., Health, N. I. of C., (US), H. D., Initiative, N. R. E., (US), N. I. for 
L., Service, U. S. P. H., & Health, U. S. D. of. (2000). Report of the 
National Reading Panel: Teaching children to read: An evidence-
based assessment of the scientific research literature on reading 
and its implications for reading instruction: Reports of the 
subgroups. National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, National …. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Oakhill, J., & Cain, K. (2007). Introduction to comprehension 

development. 

Barron, B. (2006). Interest and self-sustained learning as catalysts of 

development: A learning ecology perspective. Human Development, 
49(4), 193–224. 

Olivera, F., & Straus, S. G. (2004). Group-to-individual transfer of 

learning: Cognitive and social factors. Small Group Research, 
35(4), 440–465. 

Cain, K., & Oakhill, J. V. (1999). Inference making ability and its relation 
to comprehension failure in young children. Reading and Writing, 
11(5), 489–503. 

Paris, S. G., & Lindauer, B. K. (1976). The role of inference in children’s 
comprehension and memory for sentences. Cognitive Psychology, 
8(2), 217–227. 

Cain, K., Oakhill, J. V, & Elbro, C. (2003). The ability to learn new word 

meanings from context by school-age children with and without 
language comprehension difficulties. Journal of Child Language, 
30(3), 681. 

Cain, K., Oakhill, J., & Lemmon, K. (2004). Individual differences in the 

inference of word meanings from context: The influence of reading 
comprehension, vocabulary knowledge, and memory capacity. 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 96(4), 671. 

Paris, S. G., Lindauer, B. K., & Cox, G. L. (1977). The development of 

inferential comprehension. Child Development, 1728–1733. 

Pressley, M., & Allington, R. L. (2014). Reading instruction that works: 

The case for balanced teaching. Guilford Publications. 

Ruble, D. N., Boggiano, A. K., Feldman, N. S., & Loebl, J. H. (1980). 
Developmental analysis of the role of social comparison in self-
evaluation. Developmental Psychology, 16(2), 105. 

Cobb, P., Confrey, J., DiSessa, A., Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2003). 

Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: 

Design experiments in educational research. Educational 
Researcher, 32(1), 9–13. 

Classic definitions and new directions. Contemporary Educational 
Psychology, 25(1), 54–67. 

Cooc, N., & Kim, J. S. (2017). Peer influence on children’s reading skills: 

A social network analysis of elementary school classrooms. Journal 
of Educational Psychology, 109(5), 727. 

Worthy, J., & McKool, S. S. (1996). Students who say they hate to read: 
The importance of opportunity, choice, and access. In Yearbook-
National Reading Conference (Vol. 45, pp. 245–256). THE 
NATIONAL READING CONFERENCE, INC. 

Covington, M. V. (1998). The will to learn: A guide for motivating young 

people. Cambridge University Press. 

 

Cox, K. E., & Guthrie, J. T. (2001). Motivational and cognitive 

contributions to students’ amount of reading. Contemporary 
Educational Psychology, 26(1), 116–131. 

Cunningham, A. E., & Stanovich, K. E. (1998). What reading does for the 

mind. American Educator, 22, 8–17. 

Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes. Human 

Relations, 7(2), 117–140. 

Guthrie, J. T. (2004). Teaching for literacy engagement. Journal of Literacy 

Research, 36(1), 1–30. 

ELO 2021 Conference and Festival: Platform (Post?) Pandemic, May 26-28 
 

