 So welcome i'm very happy to see you I hope you're having a good yellow so far, if you have already been to some of the workshops and all the rice welcome at the start of your low, and I hope you're going to have a good week. So, normally, we would have a poster session that's physical and you can talk to people standing next to their poster if it's unfortunately that's not possible digitally so the poster session is sort of three fault, first we have the exhibition page which i'll share in the chat. Here, where you can see all the posters. And this is a page that's publicly available. Then we have these poster sessions, the poster sessions are not based on themes, but more on time zone, so that the fewest number of people have to get up really early are both Tibetan really nice to be able to participate. And then, if you have questions later or people who have missed this session and are watching and back there is also a general in our districts are called the poster room where you can talk to. The author, so if you're one of the authors, I do encourage you to check back in in the poster room as well to answer questions and discussion projects with other Elf participants. But what are we going to do today i'll look you have prepared a lightning talk about your post or you can share your screen. While you're talking, I hope, otherwise we'll figure it out. And then, after the presentations there's room for questions and discussion. So let's get started, we start with initiates provider. was a professor at the Department of. modern languages and graduate program of the federal University of months ago, so, and this poster considers the poetic code and material afarensis of additions of bone that's revisiting and he led predecessor. Thank you very much for the interesting introduction. And next up, we have again hammock Cedars, who is a graduate student and a high school English teacher in Northwest indiana and also a special welcome to you because she said, this is your first academic conference presenting creative work. And you'll present the work since basis, which is a hypertext that introduces and directors to a narrator reliving her experience being in an abusive marriage and subsequent ptsd. Maybe if i'm not going to let you do more. You try again. it's okay. Much. So next we have definite shepherds Bradley shepherd and will mchenry and they comprise the indie game studio Boreal games. Definitely is also pursuing a master's in English at the University of Arkansas will as an independent, professional and intermediate design and Bradley is an independent, professional in software development. And their poster introduces the simulation game tenure track, which is a postmodern critique of the 21st century, academia. Next, we have Aaron get lean ball, who is an assistant professor of applied and professional writing at kennesaw State University. And our poster reflects on an e literary approach to cultivating pedagogical platforms by considering how the role of asynchronous course design overlaps with that of gmail web comic design. you very much. And then, finally, we have a presentation by Jeremy Douglas who is associate professor at the University of California Santa Barbara and he will talk about the. History and until recent history of interactive cinema. um yeah you need to because. Yes, we see your posts in. Thank you very much, and thank you all very much I. feel like this is maybe. The first academic thing i've been part of where everyone respects a time limit. Thank you very much for all your interesting presentations I guess since we're not a very big group we don't have to go into breakout rooms and we can just start discussing it with each other. I don't know if anyone has like. A burning question, to start with dina, of course. So the question and I think a trick. That question for initiates you're looking at these two works, and I was wondering, can you talk about how your project fits into like sort of the. spectrum of specificity and represent ability like do you think there's something about these works it's very specific to them that we need to look at specifically these works for that reason, do you think that they are representative for their time or for Brazil or. Yes, any other quick questions. I agree, this is all fascinating and all linked together in very unexpected ways. So if there's no other pressing questions, I think we can end the session here. and get it done. An hour I think in our region. it's 10 o'clock. Thank you very much, and also thank you very much to all the presenters and the people discussing the posters, and I look forward to also discussing it further in the discovery channel throughout the week because obviously not everyone could be here right now. And then I want to say, good evening, not the case for and for all of you. Have a good day and a good week i'll.