 Right now, we can start the session. i'm very happy that you're all here whether this is your first day of your second I hope it'll have to be very good week. So, normally, we would have a poster session, where you would stand next to your poster you can talk to people but that's not possible digitally so the poster activity of yellow is threefold one is that there's a poster exhibition which I can share in the JET. If you can look at it, that is going to be publicly available for people at the conference and outside the conference. Then secondly we have these poster sessions which I. Try to split up by time zone, so that people wouldn't have to be really early or really late this time we do have like two people who have. come from her late and learn the time zone, Australia and. Canada so. Extra welcome to you for being here. And then, for the whole week for people who are not here today, or if you have questions later, we will also have this great channel the poster room where you can talk to each other. So for today, we will have lightning talks about every poster for about five minutes I have two URLs to every post, or so I can post them in the chat as you're talking. it's up to you how you do the presentation, so you can just talk, you can share your screen, you can share slides whichever you. want to have Okay, yes. yeah and then we do all of the. presentations in a row, and then there will be room for questions afterwards. So it's like to start with alicia Vanessa, who is a doctoral candidate in art history at the University of Oxford and as a background in medicine and neurobiology. and your poster reflects on today's electronic platforms under the conditions of physical confinements in the light of physiological evidence and philosophical issues. So this yeah, the floor is yours. Thank you very much. So next up, we have a gentleman he. was an artist and designer interested in social, technical artifacts distributed technologies interactive fiction and narrative design so you're in the right place. For poster presents the algorithm of donated dreams, the product of a speculative design experience asking what if we could donate dreams like we donate blood and she will give a lightning talk today from the perspective of the work itself so it's very exciting. very much. Oh go on with kaitlyn Fisher and moving angle caitlyn is professor of cinema and media arts at York University in Toronto. where she directs the storytelling lab and the augmented reality lab marinas lecturer and digital culture at the University of Queensland and associate professor of digital humanities at the University of Alberta and their process showcases digital experiments that query expect. That clarity investigation into who and what and how emerging technologies connect with our bodies lives and desires. very much. And next up, we have Julia Carla policy. And she is the greatest lot. She is the British Library director for digital collections and her poster introduces the British Library simulator which let players explore and a pixelated rendition of popular areas and players discover what the library staff has been working on during the pandemic. Thank you very much. And we continue with a close Michael slashing Alex holds and Mona belief from the data science Center for literature. And access digital curator at the German literature archive Mona is research assistant at the German that's rich archive and class Michael is. Research associate at digital humanities department at the University of students and their poster reflect on the demands that net literature and born digital archival material places on archiving research and reading. Thank you very much. Then we have the last presentation of the session just by Daddy apatow was an independent media poets and co founder and curator, of the one on one media poetry festival. See presents works of participants of the first version lap of media poetry one on one for teenagers. Thank you so much for all the interesting works and all of your interesting presentations since we're not too many people I don't think we have to go into breakout rooms, to discuss. We can just have a plenary. discussion here. So with like to start with a question for one of the presenter one of the other prisoners. Oh, if you're in the translation one. that's the other one. And Julia also has a question to the same thing so maybe we can do that one. Right now. Seven the other question. you another question. The end. Like a great project follow up to do. get it that's later we'll see about. That. And this is a question. Any final questions. Then I think we can. end this session, for now, thank you very much for all of your interesting presentations and interesting questions and answers, and I hope that we get to. Further, the conversation in the pasta room on the discovery channel, and I wish you all a very happy yellow the rest of the week.