Stewart for your great work.Now, let's continue question, a comment in the chat about turning the live captions on.Can somebody who can somebody do that. Let's see if I can run now everyone can do it. also think.Wonderful.Now, I will mention that these board vacancies, the Board of Directors is in conversation about how it wants to fill these board vacancies. We have retreats in July where we will address these matters and then one of the, the requests from the communityhas been to get the community more involved in the selection of board of director, members.This requires potentially some changes to our bylaws, which will be considering our retreat in July, but whether we make changes to the bylaws in this matter, or, or not, we still want to get more community inputs and involvement in deciding, who's onthe board of directors.The budget. I'm not going to go into a numbers breakdown but I mentioned that we have three main funding sources membership is our number one from the source.So the membership that you all pay supports the organization and supports the its initiatives. We do have an institutional partnership with Washington State University in Vancouver.That ends next year. We also receive donations usually targeted to specific initiatives such as some of the yellow awards, some of that yellow fellows, etc.Most of our budget about 10% of our budget goes towards administrative costs, we have Holly Slocum as our administrative assistant who dedicates about 10 hours a week to working with the yellow matters.And we have other costs that come with, with being an organization.About 90% of our budget goes to ELO initiatives, which I will highlight, with the help of the board now.First of all our conferences.We have been doing yearly conferences, whether they're International, I mean whether they're face to face or online. This is our second online conference.This is where community comes together we tend to see these conferences about $2,000, to help them get started. Sometimes we recoup that sometimes we don't, and that's part of the cost of operation.I'll mention that we are considering to pre proposals for yellow 2022 for hybrid conferences.I cannot provide more details at this stage but we will be announcing things as soon as decisions are made there.The electronic literature directory, which is overseen by Joe Tavi, he asked me to read this brief statement. He says we're presently working to extend our network of literary advisors in support of this Carlo the entries that are fellows and other earlycareer scholars are bringing to the directory Board approval is a key element of all year. These entry submissions, and they mean editorial board not yellow board of directors are descriptions of works encyclopedic essays and glossary entries on keywordsand concepts. Currently we have entries on our underway on it and post humanism a focus for a march post humanism conference in Bergen, Norway. The ELD team, welcome similar entries in response to our elaboration of scholarly papers and creative workspresented during the our hosts yellow this conference were in, in support of this heightened ELD activity, we're expanding our network of reviewers, for example, members of each generation of yellow fellows are now being asked to review entries, writtenby all yellow Members, any questions can be sent to ELD managing editor and 2020 2021 yellow fellow Danny Spinoza.Alright.Continuing the emerging spaces for elite creations was an initiative we launched last year, we received them and awarded to proposals for filter instead Xen that has an open call until June 1 for its first issue that's coming this summer, and reverb,a launching this week, their, their call for their call for works, or call for submissions and you can find that on in the gesso app reverb. An interesting thing about these two.Two new publication venues for our field is that one and Instagram is very visually focused and reverb is very focused on sound. So I hope this, these two spaces become productive spaces for you all to publish and and experience and study and enjoy aliterature.Next step, Bini, when I say a few words about the next.Yes, on for the last four years have been working to pull together. Electronic literature in an archive so that it's accessible to folks.And so it has recently been renamed the next and has been re released as a virtual museum library slash, slash preservation space.There's a full tour the next taking place Friday by the producers of this space. 39 students in my program spent the last semester, building out this space, there's the, the URL there for you to look at, know that today at noon we're ingesting imagesfor Dino Larson's Collection. This is an ongoing project, we will never be finished with it. We're ingesting every day images and information so if you see information about your work that's not correct, do not hesitate to contact me because we are tryingto get this information to be correct and to be available to the public. All the time 24 seven for free. Thank you.Thank you. the me.Next up a brief update on the electronic literature Collection Volume for by Congress.Hello. Greetings, everyone. Thanks, Leo.Yes, a brief update is due. So the LLC for editorial collective which is me, Kathy barons john Murray a lot of scams and visa Maura we were really impressed by the quality of works submitted.And we believe we will have a finance ology.After much work. We have finally completed the evaluation of these works, 350 of them having accepted approximately 30% of work submitted nominated and solicit you.So if you have your work accepted. You're already notified and we will be hearing from us soon with more specific requests for materials.As we received many submissions. We were required to make some very difficult choices. And of course, we hope everyone understands that a rejection is not a statement on the merit of the work.So, I'm delighted to informing the name of the collective that our current goal is to launch the collection by the end of 2021.At your service always let me know if you have any questions. Oh and the whole congratulations Soren Scott, and everyone involved in the organization of the conference.Thank you. really.Now the yellow fellows. Again, Joe was going to present this part asked me to send this statement, he said that all as well with each of the seven appointed fellows who are our last meeting presented summaries of their respective projects.We anticipate the 2021 22 call will be going out in the next few weeks. Any questions can be sent to Joseph tabby@uib.no, and I'll simply mentioned that the yellow fellows.In general, we focus on early career scholars and graduate students. We want to do a academic year long sometimes a little longer period for their projects that are usually fellow defined, sometimes they're targeted.So we have the amplify anti racism fellows, Margaret re and Keith Wilson who helped us, you know, with with projects there, but also folks like Richard Snyder working on the next I believe Sean Brown, as well.And so, we, you know, we'll be sending out the call soon.All right, ELO at MLA, Alex Terrell Hi everybody. Hi.Yes, we are super excited we have two great, great proposals and great, I mean we're going to have a great representation and Emily 22, which is happening in Washington DC though both of our panels will be taking place online.This is because partially we have actually great cross section representation this year, having presenters from Eastern Europe, South and North America so Canada and the US, but we also been maintaining a good balance of academic representation from folksat different stages in their careers. So we have grad students and postdocs and tenure track faculty and artists that's really great. And as you can see the topics are very exciting.You have the list here.And we, we are very happy to be engaging deeply with next year's presidential theme which is multilingual journalism, which is great for us.But we're going to do it with from a few different perspectives. So anyways, anybody who has an Emily may remember is welcome to attend and I hope to see you there.So, very happy about this.Thank you Alex.Now the yellow awards, honor, are you here I didn't.Yes.I'm here, I'm here in my T shirt.Make conference t shirt.Yeah. Um, hello everyone, I have a great pleasure to be a convener for the yellow awards this year. And as you probably know we have three words, and you can see the particular categories here, and I'm so happy to be able to work with the grades jurymembers who whose names you can also see on the slide, and I already know the decisions but I welcome you, I invite you for the award ceremony in two days so I will share the news, but I will make to emphasize that.I think we've got great nominations. Basically, there was 72 nominations in total nine nominations for major Mary Lou Sabrina Career Achievement Award, 15 nominations for and Catherine has a word for the credit for criticism of electronic literature andstaggering 49 nominations for Robert Coover award for the best work of electronic literature. So, the jury, the jury did an excellent job, and please join us on Friday evening to hear the news.Thank you. Thank you.Now, next up, let's talk a little bit about equity, diversity and inclusion initiatives and, in, in the yellow, and I'll leave Anastasia Salter to talk a little bit about this.Well, so this is the code of conduct, that the board drafted and approved, it's based on codes of conduct that we've had at previous conferences, as well as the geek feminism.Creative Commons license to code which has been vetted by amused by a number of organizations across both academic and technical fields and thus represents a space that has faced similar similar challenges as our communities, has at times.We particularly wanted to kind of move forward on this, as we're thinking about hybrid, and potentially more virtual engagement as a common mode of expanding our community over the coming years.So we hope that this will assist both conference organizers thinking about the system the future and set the guidelines for meaningful inclusive participation and the community going forward.Thank you so much, and I will add that every month on First Fridays, or sometimes they happen on a second Friday but every month, I will be hosting a session, called FBI in the yellow, or we'll talk about these issues.So, you are all welcome to join.And this is an ongoing work. It is a consideration we're bringing into all aspects of what we do everything. And know that, you know, some of that might come up in the discussion today but but in general, we are working hard at at making the ELO an organizationthat is equitable diverse and inclusive.Let's continue.So, I will end with with, you know, again, I hope these initiatives, help justify the membership. Most of the membership, as I said 90% of that goes right into these initiatives gets reinvested right into the field.We do a lot of advocacy work, and we help the, the, you know, we help our colleagues, we help grow the field we help nurture it we help have it.You know, for it to have memory. And of course, we have other initiatives, we do publications we do archiving we do many things. So whether you attended the conference or looking at this in a recording afterwards, please consider joining the yellow supportingour activities with your membership. And, you know, we look forward to having you as part of our, our big family.And now I'll open things up for the QA, and for that I will stop sharing and leave.Caitlin Fisher in charge. I will not be able to remain for the rest of the discussion, but I will be watching the recording. And I will see you all a little later at the opening, and in the conference.Thank you.Thanks, Leo.Enjoy the rest of the day and welcome everybody. I do see a few new faces so if you're new to the Hello a special welcome to you, and otherwise nice to see so many friends here.So I guess this is really the town hall moment where we can take questions from the floor you can put questions in the chat but we would love to hear what the membership has to say.So this is your time.You can use the little hand raise but I think I can also see your physical hands if you'd like to participate that way.Well I think our initiatives you're clearly you're still thinking about all of the amazing yellow initiatives.It's actually been a fantastic year for for new ideas to bring things to conclusion. I'm also going to just echo Louise, you know, and take this moment while people are gathering questions to congratulate the organizing teams.I've been sort of more peripherally involved, but there's so much work that has gone into the conference. I almost I can't even really start to name, start with with with soreness Scott but there are so many you know Jason was working like right up tolike that time and all these incredible posters, eight different exhibitions.Anyway, just been a fantastic labor, and I know that they'll be a more full some opportunity for Thank you, later on at the opening but I wanted to begin by acknowledging that too.So thanks, on behalf of the yellow for everybody who took part in organizing the conference space we're in right nowjust zoom teaching no no Anastasia was many people have their cameras on so it's not exactly like zoom teaching should have like all cameras off and one person in bed.Dina has her hand up, Dina, over to you.I apologize my private computer is the only one in the world without a webcam.The others are government computers so forgive me.But I did want to and I will put it in the chat.Say thank you guys so much for all of your initiatives as well on the code of conduct that you've been doing, and finding ways to include people this has been so important for people with handicap access around the world of financial issues as well sothank you for that. The second Tuesday salon had an incredibly active brainstorming session and I put it into the chat for inclusion solutions, and I know the board is meeting on these, and I hope that that initiative continues and that we can continueto reach out to people.I also wanted to say. Personally, I know that the pandemics been very difficult, but having an online component has been life saving extremely important.Thank you guys so much for this and even if we can meet in person. I do hope that we're planning on at least some online, and the second Tuesday salons, every second Tuesday.11am. Eastern Standard Time.And anybody's willing, ready to join. We do have that going on for distance and accessibility. It's been very fun.Thank you guys so much and shout out for doing what you do for inclusive city.Thanks so much for that comment and also for your, your leadership you need amazing leadership around the salon, and also for pushing us to to do better work all the time and just for being such an incredible number of the ELO community.Other thoughts. This is also a chance for you to you don't have to comment on any initiatives here just sort of like where you're at and ideas that the board can take back and think about as well.Andalso initiatives, you might like to see.I'm just enjoying watching everyone be silent together.It's our new meditative space at yellow where we just have time to refresh where you can book off of meetings at work, just come here and do nothing.So Scott.It's true. It's actually it's quite nice.If I could make one one suggestion that I did I mentioned to a couple of board members already, which is simply that I would, the, the part of the Code of Conduct dealing with the conferences, I would consider putting that into a separate document, andJust because there's a couple of potential issues there. One is that although it's great to have both online and in person conferences, or the can be both.It's, it can be a challenging thing for conference organizers to, to actually be challenged to do both of those things at the same time.And that can also be it, although it sounds like its inclusion airy, that can also be exclusionary, in the sense that there's a lot of institutions that would not be able to pull together the resources to do that.And then the other aspect of that that I that I would really consider is, although of course, we want to make sure that we adhere to two best practices and in human rights and equality is that if we restrict ourselves if we say to two artists and twoinstitutions that we can't organize conferences in any country where any of these principles are being violated, that's also going to say to you know to the artists and to the academics in countries where, where these things are not adhere to certainlyNorway's in a great position with this. But in many other countries are not for example, last year.I think that the Trump administration would have been in violation of many of those principles in the US, and that would have meant that last year's conference could not have been held in Orlando.So there's a lot of these sort of details that that I think we can sort of rush to to these sorts of things and say that sounds like a great idea. But I would encourage you to think those through carefully, and then to consider separating those two documents.So that one might be guidelines for conference organization, or these are the things we would love to see in future conferences. And then the other via via code of conduct.And then the last thing that I would say about that is that I think as an organization and I'm so glad that so many people stepped up from the yellow board you know it's especially single Caitlyn and Mark Marino.For and and also other people Eric lawyer and Claudia, who's kind of came in and helped us out with a lot of stuff with the conference, but I think in that statement of those guidelines that yellow should also articulate what its role will be cuz rightnow it says future conference organizers will be required to do this and this and this and just reading it from the perspective of someone if you want them to come in and organize a conference, and with the first thing you do is give them a code of conductthat has at the very bottom of it.These are conference guidelines preceded by don't violate human rights and all these ways.I think you're going to pose some challenges to the organization in the future. So I just wanted to you know to put that out there I know that it's it's a great initiative and I know that these things are often living documents, but I would actually encourageyou to think carefully about revising that document.Thank you very much for that comment Scott will take that back to the board for consideration. I think a lot of our members are here right now.Other points either related to that issue or two other things that are on your mind either in response to our current initiatives or two initiatives that you'd like to see there's quite a bit of discussion in the chat now aboutthe value of remote conferences minimizing travel potentially finding other ways to have some online events.So I think there's a lot of creativity, we could bring to finding the right the right balance here.Sorry.Yeah, I just want to add into to what what what Scott said, by, by saying basically we wouldn't have been able to, to make both an online, and, and, and, and a physical conference that would have been impossible.It's quite well actually doing a virtual conference is easier when it is virtual because you all have your own cameras you know if you do a physical conference, you have to have a camera team, which is you know a whole lot of other costs.All we should think about other ways of being together because I'm totally for finding ways that where we don't have to travel around the world.Once a year.Also for climate reasons obviously but but also to be inclusive.Thanks very much. We have Dina has her hand up again, or is this from last time. No, this is another one, but ok also. I'm Mark Marino has been developing a wonderful calendar that I can't access, and there's so many online events and so many in personevents Mark, can you explain how that calendar works.Sure, sure. Dana. Well, like all of our communications.We again, it may lead to a little bit of a bottleneck but we prefer for members just to be out events just that send them my way I'll put them up on the calendar, I'm happy to do that just the same way I poured events and announcements to our email ELOlisser.But if it.If it makes it with that.Where is that calendar.Where's the, what's the URL you mean, or where can you share the URL for that calendar in the chat at least. Thanks.Yeah, I'll put it so. So the question was, was you can't find the yellow calendar I'm sorry I thought it was about posting to the yellow calm. Right. well one I can't find it into how do people get events on the calendar.Yeah, so I will post the link to the catalyst someone's there faster for me. I'll put the link to the calendar in the discord chat.And Mark sample has a great suggestion that I'll let him talk about in a second if he wants to. And then, and then if you have any announcements have any events whatsoever.Just send an email.And for anybody here you've got a really captive audience I encourage everybody put your announcements in the chat right now, and following this conference to will try to follow in support your events and initiatives.I'd also really encourage anybody who, especially if this is your first yellow to introduce yourself in the chat.I know not everybody wants to speak up at a town hall, but we'd love to know who you are and to make an effort to to connect with you over the course of the next couple of days.Yes, absolutely. Check out the discord channel, I think, marks done an amazing job I think it was set up by last games last year marks continuing it at the moment it's very vibrant.It tests of ebbs and flows, but we're hoping to be able to, to see a lot of you on Discord.Other questions. This is a very peaceful town hall we're all very Zen here. Oh, Jeremy has a new book coming out later this year.Fantastic.Dina's announcing the salons.Congratulations, Jeremy, congrats stina.everybody had their presentations done.I just raised my hand I guess I don't need to because it's so silent.But I the question, I kind of from a board member to the people who are on the board here but just to everybody in the community. Leo said earlier that you know we're thinking about different ways to change who sits on the board of directors.So, so right now basically the board of directors new members are are basically kind of vetted by current board of directors and there's, there's a vote.But there's been discussion among some board members about like, maybe opening this up somehow so I'm just curious while we while we're all here if if folks have other ideas or thoughts about how members to the Board of Directors, or at least some numbers,maybe not entirely the entire slate but some members of the Board of Directors might be kind of coming from the community, anything like that. And, you know, any thoughtsor is it working just fine right now.One thought I know what some organizations do, is that they when they have you know separate board of directors in the in the corporate structure that that the yellow has as a 501 c three nonprofit organization.I know that what some organized organizations do would be to have some slots on the board that are nominated by by the organization's general membership.And then still approved by the board of directors. And I think in the case of the ELO.I'm familiar with the bylaws of the yellow, because I wrote with a lawyer.A long time ago.But, but that would still be within the current bylaws of the of the ELO, for example, to have members at large, that are nominated by the lo community, and then sort of simply approved by the board of directors.Yeah, that's great Scott that idea has come up before and one thing I want to kind of point out I guess some of us know and some of us don't, and I don't even know the entire entirety of the legal ramifications but you know we are a legal entity withlegal status so there are certain things we can do in certain things we can't do without involving lawyers, when it comes to change in our bylaws are operating.So that's something, just in case anybody's thinking why don't you just kind of wave your hand and start doing something differently. Sometimes they're kind of legal reasons that we cannot just change the way we operate.This is a great discussion to have also pointed out to that most board members have been active members of the community. It's not like we draw from somehow mysteriously outside of our membership most people nominated have been, you know, within the thefolds of the ELO and are nominated that way but I think this is something that.It's good to have a lot, a number of options and and ways of working to make that feel like, like the process is not so opaque. And so we'll definitely be considering this I just want I see your hand in it, you'll be next I just want to shout out someof the things in the chat. We have oh it's all come up there's so many things that are happening. Someone just finished their thesis Sam is here from India first time at yellow so check the chat there.Thank you. Nice to meet you.Roberta's thesis on Italian electronic literature is coming up, November 2021 So congratulations for that. And Carlotta is is new and has been helping behind the scenes with the conference, fantastic, and someone else's mentioned, the lab the literaryadvisory board.And that's also a fantastic way where people can be making contributions from our community.It's been relatively inactive for the last little while but we have plans for activating it, and all of the you know the incredible resource that we have out there.So, Danny then, Stephanie I see a hand.Now one thing I'll say about board. I joined in 2006 and it takes a lot of time. So one of the things to think about if you're interested in being on the board is the amount of time commitment, it takes.If you're going up for tenure if you're trying to finish a dissertation. This is not the time to be on the board, but certainly we want people that are very active in the community that want to contribute their time and energy.All of us on one thing you'll, you'll also learn is that we, we do not take money from the yellow so board members are not paid to do any of the work we do, we're all volunteers.So we fly to a conference and we do something, it's usually it's always out of our own expenses so it does take a little bit of energy and time commitment to be on the board, but certainly welcome anyone who's interested.Thank you, Stephanie.Yes, I was gonna say along the same lines that it's a working bored, not an advisory board nobody just advises and the amount of work is very much. You can't always tell, we've had an extremely busy spring work, and the amount of hours for consultingit was required. We also pay for our own to belong to the year, and to pay conference Tues. So, there's no perks for being on the board, other than wonderful company by people who really care about the field, and, you know, really do their best, and weanyone who was interested to that degree, we'd love to hear from you and if you would like to be part of the literary advisory board, and with there's a number of things we would like such people to do a Joe would like people to write descriptions forthe yield descriptions of of email it works and which there's, you know so many that we'd like to learn more about and have described and become part of literature where they can be studied by other people, but other things too.I mean we have places to show installations of work and to post conference, many, many things that would be wonderful. So, please.And, you know, Caitlin if people do want to express an interest is that, is there some should they be writing Mark I mean, what's the way to express it What's a direct way for someone to express an interest that they might have anything we have one formalmechanism I would invite anybody here if you're seriously considering that you would like to be more active or be involved in a leadership, or in the literary advisory board in some way to contact any of the board members who are here, and we can be,you know, we can work on getting back to you and if it's not an immediate action item if it's sort of like, you know, interested in being put forward at some other time we might not immediately get back to but we will keep that running list I think itwould be amazing to find out who's interested in doing this work, because we're constantly seeking renewal, Mark, give a better, maybe, everyone contact no no I don't know.I don't have a better answer they can contact anyone on the board. No, I wouldn't say a couple things. The first one is, again, this this thanks to our organizers and congratulations on putting together a fantastic conference, I mean this is, I've beenattending conferences for over 25 years and this is the most extraordinary one I've ever been a part of where there are eight.Eight international art exhibitions. There are multiple continents that are actually hosting events for this conference, and there are over 200 people in attendance is just extraordinary to me I have not seen anything like this ever.The second thing I want to say is if you have an event that you would like ELO to be a co sponsor of, we have a mechanism for you to request our sponsorship.Now sometimes that sponsorship comes in the form of my job just communication so we'll help amplify you will put it out on all of our channels will get people to in their Zoo seats are in there in person sees if we can help in any way with that.So that's one thing we can do and then also another thing that we, we support our grant applications, we can be a sponsoring organization for a coat, you know, one of the, the oversight.I don't know it's officially call it on on your grant. So we have a mechanism for that.And again, so and I guess I want to put this in the context of my previous answer which is, you know, one of the things, one of the reasons we don't just make the calendar, open access or we don't make the listserv open access is so that when you havesomething that you want to get out to membership. It helps us to have a little bit of a heads up about it. So then we can help amplify in through appropriate channels and really try to organize our membership around that so there are lots of ways ELOcan support you.Even with your very very local events, or even something that you might think is of a smaller order we can help BB co sponsors of those, because we're trying to feel those is maybe a lot more decentralized then you might think.Okay, thanks.That's such an excellent point mark the other thing I'll say is I remember you know kind of as an Emerging Scholar encountering those, those applications where it's like, what is your dissemination strategy, and what are your outreach and thinking like,you know, be an organization like this can be part of your dissemination strategy. And you can say that you will amplify you know our network could be your network.If you have a book that's coming out if you've got a conference that's coming out if you have a grant that could use the new, and you you're looking at the ways in which your results will be made, you know, will be, will enter to community.So, this is something you might not have thought about before, So thanks for reminding us mark.People are winning things are wonderful to your scholarship Agnieszka, is that the correct way to pronounce your name, can you correct me.Yes, it was clearly pronounce. Thank you. Thank you. Well congratulations to your scholarship to the UK, oh and you're working with Kate Ballinger That's fantastic.And like she recently won a grant through the direct support of date Dini and the yellow.Excellent will pay for students salaries. Yes, keep those success stories coming.Jeremy height is writing one book that's one word today on Twitter.That's a lifetime project that's commitment Jeremy, thanks for that.And we're talking about oh book launches like like she means new work. Fantastic. Yes, I suppose supporting your book launches.I guess that's the other way to imagine this is how we can serve you and what do you want out of your membershipmarket Mark has raised his hand again, or is that your can from before.Sorry, you've opened the floodgates Yes, in addition to hosting our monthly First Friday, yellows on the discord in of course supporting the second Tuesday salons.If you have a book that's coming out thats related to the electronic literature topics.The first Friday on the discord is a great place to have a lunch.I'm happy to host or we can get one of our other board members to host or where we can set up the perfect time for you. And it really has turned out to be another fantastic platform to help promote the work of our members so sorry I just want to add that.Great Margie I see your hand.Hello, can you hear me. Yep. We can hear you. Okay.Um, you know I'm just listening to all of this and thinking how incredible it is to see these wonderful people and all of this activity at this conference.I'm having having been around since, with Scott, since we're in, and and many others since we launched this ELO way back in 1999 and 200.We're now 21 years into the project, and it has exceeded anything I could have possibly imagined. I want to welcome all the new people, and all the people from around the world.I want to congratulate the organizers of this when I tell people about the fact that we're in India, Denmark, Norway, Vancouver, Washington, having a 24 hour conference.That includes people from all over the world.The first thing that most people respond is so that must be a nightmare for the organizers and I, I am just so impressed with the way that this. This program has evolved and.And I think that you also what you've heard is that we're here for you. We have grown in 21 years, to be able to serve our community in so many ways, and we want you definitely to take advantage of that and to invite your friends to come to the next conference.Thanks for all of you for being here.Beautifully said my G.That's another reason why ala was one of my favorite communities to Margie and all of the amazing people who are here. I also encourage you if you look around, there are only 46 participants in this chat.This is a. It's definitely a growing field, you know, very different from 1999, but at the same time, this is still, you know, a global community in which you know we will get to know your names and everybody can make a difference you know we're, we'rebuilding this field together. So, thank you.Let's see. No other hands right now but I'm going to talk about rub link in the chat has a new work in progress a big book of net profit net profit network improvise literature for the classroom and beyond.That's amazing looking forward to that.And twining new book from Anastasia. Amazing. That's incredible.Dini and Mary's have a book with Cambridge on migration translation and emulation of ILIT amazingand Astrid has pre web digital publishing and the lore of electronic literature forthcoming incredibleAnd Allen sun time has been working on the internet tech since 1994, there's another it's like it's a combination of he lit and performance art it's incredible on You're such a pioneer a daily meditation work every day since 1994.That's, that's incredible work.All right, I'll work there for a second. Are there any.We just have those interjections of ambient audio from somewhere around the world.I'll even say Caitlin everybody that's new that's posting into the chat saying hey I'm new I'm feeling like I'm kind of walking into a town hall that I don't know anybody know that you're here you are part of the community.And we're so glad to have you as part of this organization, Thank you for being here.Absolutely. I'm loving the chat next year we could just do the town hall only chat only is obviously a lot of writers in the groupto participants have raised their hands.Oh, I think it's just mark and Margie don't have their hands back down or do you have something else to say.Sadly,I think what will merge you put your hand back then I will say, Hey, Hey everyone, if you're new to yellow is special channel in the discord for introductions and there's a welcome section as well so please go in and introduce yourself.Also, continuing our work from last summer.Rob wedding and I are running the yellow cafe, which is meant to be an informal space on the discord where you can gather and socialize with one another almost in the way we would if we were there in person, maybe even better.Also just want to mention that there is a channel for the town hall. So this conversation, does not have to end here if you have other ideas or other thoughts or questions that come up during the course of the conference, you can just go into that discordchannel and post them in there, and they will be brought to the attention of the board something we could talk about during the retreat or people might even respond to you right there so please make make you know as whatever use you can and the discordis there to be not only a place where we can have these formal discussions, but a place where we can maybe make up some of the parts of the informal conference that are difficult to have overs cocktails on the Discord.I want to amplify something else from the chat, Tina Scalia, is that correct pronunciation of your last name. Sorry.He says, That's no problem, Tina, Scott. No, thank you. Um, it has an amazing new multilingual project related to the theme.It's uncovered 19 includes art installations testimonies generative poetry and even a capture poem. And I will just drop that back into the chat again.I also want to regulations that sounds amazing. I want to congratulate Tina on having the most giant coronavirus I've ever seen.Oh and has put you can reply to this tweet if you are new to ELO.Oh, that's fantastic. Yeah, we can we can get things going on Twitter as well. I think for those of you if this is your first clo and you haven't had an opportunity to meet with us in person we very much look forward to that as well.We generally have very, very fun in person components of the conference that this court will discord will be like, almost as good but never quite as good.And the hashtag Mark has put in there.All right, well, maybe one thing just to mention is that Jason just got to have the, I think, two or three of the new exhibitions, have just gone up.So, if you go to, e literature.org slash yellow 2021, the kitty lead exhibition which I don't know if you're at the opening but was was fantastic.Is, is there.Also the an exhibition of posters and of course, the flash back exhibition is now hooked up, as well as the, the draft exhibition the future text exhibition with some really interesting work from, from Indian in Asia have those of all just been launchedtoday, so be sure to check them out.Thanks guys, it's super extraordinary I really I don't want to pre because I know we've got like an actual like opening of the whole conference but I will like it's the amount of of artistic work, the amount of labor that's gone into it, but eight differentexhibitions, just just even creating the interfaces to all of the art was an exceptional achievement and then it's just so diverse and so global and just like opening after opening.It's kind of like relentless activity and and and just exceptional quality beautiful curation incredibly diverse works from around the world. So we think we should be very, very proud of that and so thankful for organizers.And our artists.Can I something Caitlyn. Yeah, absolutely. And the next we're going to be hosting exhibitions right so the after flashes the first treasure trove vault, you know exhibition from the next.But we have traveling shows that are coming through as well. So for example, after our show closes the after flash it closes on August 1 August 2, we have the trans creation exhibition coming in from McGill University in, and you can write from Montreal.And that is a pleasure also and it features a gusto to campus is work, resilient artists were looking for other exhibitions so if you're interested in curating and online exhibition for the next, please reach out to us because we'd love to have guessedcurators for the next shows some of the shows will come from the vaults.Some will be traveling so we're looking for things to follow after December, 30, that's when the accomplice show closes.So please reach out to me and let me know if you're interested. Thank you.Fantastic. Just quickly scanning through the chat again before we go I have asteroid saying is totally awesome that we have john mccain here Did anyone mention that I'm mentioning it.Welcome. Thank you for joining us.Yeah, that to the chat can be that can be the best part.And many thank yous to to Dina and to Dini for all the work she's doing the gather town exhibition is there. And, yeah, it's, it's wonderful to see you all.I think we're coming to a close here.It's incredible to have so many pioneers in the room. I won't embarrass everybody by pointing out by name, but we basically as I scan through we've got like the, the, the, the pioneers and the early practitioners of electronic literature and the peoplewho helped to institutionalize it. We've got people who've never been here before. We've got this incredible range of practices, represented and very very excited to spend this next bit of time with you at the conference and to to enter into this exerciseof building community with you here, as we move forward. So, this isn't the only chance for you to give us your suggestions or input or to hear more about us, talk to any board member, over the course of the entire conference and, and I'll give us a alwaysreach out to mark, you can.Who's in charge of all of the channels and can amplify you and your amazing work.Thanks, Mark. All right, I think, I think that's everything I think we're at time any, any last words beyond those phones.No.