Agnieszka Przybyszewska 
University of Lodz  
 
A narrative approach to ambient literature: embodied spoken monologue and enhanced 
interactional metalepsis1 
 
 

I.  Ambient literature that needs to lend its readers bodies to tell stories 

 

Ambient literature concept was developed in a research project led in years 2016-2019 
at the Digital Culture Research Centre at the University of the West England in collaboration 
with  Bath  Spa  and  Birmingham  Universities.  The  term  was  proposed  to  describe  “situated 
writing practices in which text is able to respond to the site of reading” (Dovey, Abba, Pullinger 
2020:  5)  and  the  aim  of  this  practice-based  research  project  was  to  look  for  new  forms  of 
literature  that  spring  from  combining  place-based,  situated  writing  and  new  (also  location-
based) technologies; the project was conducted in “active dialog” with publishing industry (10). 
Ambient literature concept was proposed as an umbrella term to talk about what is possible in 
literary field production and the project aim was to gather “perspectives and findings for wider 
use and future development” (10). Emma Whittaker compellingly sums up the broad spectrum 
of ambient literature field, arguing that: “ambient literature can be considered a frame denoting 
narrative practices in which the structure and story consent is intentionally integrated within 
the reader’s physical surroundings”. As a consequence not only the reader becomes part of 
the story, but also “their environment is turned into the setting for the story events” (Whittaker 
2020: 233).  

In this paper, in order to characterize ambient literature works and the experience of 
reading them, I will look at them through the lenses of three well-known concepts: palimpsest, 
metalepsis and syllepsis. Then I will ask about the poetics of such works, about the narrative 
form that can be useful to create such literary experiences. I will focus mostly on one of the 
possibilities:  enhanced form of what had been characterized as a  spoken monologue. I will 
illustrate my argument with some terse examples (deeper analysis, due to the imposed paper 

length, definitely goes beyond its scope).  

Ambient literature proposes the new concept of author-reader contract. Such literary 
experiences are fully “embodied readings” (Abba, Spencer 2020), not only “cybersomatic e-lit 
works” that rather use readers’ bodies as a kind of reading tools (those are also told to work 
on metaleptic level (Ensslin et al. 2020)). Ambient literature works need their readers’ bodies 
(understood as a part of the ambient) to tell the story. So the author-reader contract takes the 
form of declaration: “Dear Reader, lend me your body, and then I will show you my story”2. 
And let me remind here that the aim for ambient literature project researchers was “to think 
about work that makes the phenomena of the embodied and material reader a key determinant 
of the text, not a problem to be elided” (Dovey, Abba, Pullinger 2020: 19-20). 

Some of proposed concepts can be as well used to describe literary locative narratives, 
what was in scope of my research during last years (Przybyszewska 2020). The complicated 

 

1 This paper has received funding from the Polish National Agency for Academic Exchange in the 
Bekker programme (grant agreement No PPN/BEK/2019/1/00264/U/00001). 
2 This declaration can function not only in e-lit, but also in many other fields of art (Górska-Olesińska, 
Przybyszewska 2020). 

relation  between  the  field  of  ambient  literature  and  literary  locative  narratives  (see  Dovey, 
Abba, Pullinger 2020: 14-17) unfortunately goes beyond the scope of this paper. 
 

I. 

II. 

Palimsestsous, metaleptic experiences for sylleptic protagonists 
 
Palimpsestuous structure of palimpsestuous experience 
 
At the very beginning of Carlos Fuentes’ Aura, there is a moment when Felipe Montero, 
the  main  protagonist  whose  name  and  personality  is  uncanny  imposed  on  the  reader, 
wanders, looking for the Donceles 815 street. Various time layers, past and present, overlap 
in the oniric, empty city and Felipe (thus, also the reader, textual “You”) sees simultaniuselly 
old and new door plates with building numbers or street names from the past mixed with the 
present ones as if the past shown through the presence. Fuentes’ vision vividly illustrates the 
figure of palimpsest, which is a perfect metaphor of ambient literature works as well as of the 
character of such works reading.  

When  the  reader’s  ambient  becomes  part  of  the  story,  the  storyworld  overlaps  the 
actual one (and the other way round). As a consequence, there are various “layers” of reality 
that  the  reader  is  immersed  in;  and  they  are  blended,  like  in  Fuentes’  story.  The  ambient 
literature  reader  has  to  sum  up  information  from  all  the  layers,  including  his  actual 
surroundings, to get the whole picture. As underlined by Matt Hayler, ambient literature not 
only is palimpsestuous itself, but it also “asks to be read palimpsestuously” (Hayler 2020: 91).  
Interviews  with  readers  (which  were  an  important  part  of  the  ambient  literature  
research project) show another similarity with Felipe Montero’s experience. They document 
testimonies of being lost between the realities, of not knowing to which reality (actual or literary, 
fictional  one)  particular  sounds,  actions  or  facts  belong.  They  depict  constant  crossing  of 
ontological borders. “[I]t’s really funny, but I thought I was listening to the city, and I suddenly 
became aware that I was listening to it on my headphones. It blended so naturally” - explained 
one of the interviewed readers, while another claimed: “I actually thought that it was happening 
for real in the street… I could hear barking… I really jumped and looked around” (Hayler 2020: 
99). These readers were like Felipe Montero, who was lost in time and - in a little metaphorical 
way - between the stories and worlds.   
 

II. 

Enhanced interactional metalepsis 

 
Thus, because of their palimpsestuous character, ambient literature works propose to 
 
readers  the  metaleptic  experiences:  they  blend  two  different  worlds,  two  ontological 
dimensions.  Metalepsis,  defined  in  the  1980s.  by  Gérard  Genette,  is  a  term  used  to 
characterize different types of violations of ontological boundaries; it serves to describe the 
movement  between  narrative  levels  or  separate  worlds  (e.g.  between  the  fictional  and  the 
actual ones). Having in mind various typologies of metalepsis, I will focus on the ontological 
metalepsis (Fludernik 2003) and, above all, on what Bell and Ensslin in their last publication 
have  called  convergent  interactional  metalepsis  (Bell,  Ensslin  2021:  112-113),  staying 
focused,  like  these  researchers,  on  crossing  boundaries  between  the  actual  world  and  the 
storyworld.  In  fact,  presented  analysis  of  metaleptic  character  of  ambient  literature  can  be 
seen as supplement to the analysis of interactional metalepsis subtypes IV and V presented 
by  Bell  and  Ensslin.  Additional  question  is  if  the  ambient  literature  isn’t  using  as  ultimate 
interactional metalepsis as VR (Bell, Ensslin 2021: 104-115). 

Metalepsis has been deeply characterized in literary theory discourse, and its initially 
underresearched area(s) - the metalepsis in digital storytelling - has been also examined (e.g. 
Kukkonen 2011, Bell 2016). However, these analyses, based eg. in Rayan thesis that cursor 
can be a virtual representation of the reader in the storyworld (Ryan 2006: 122) were mostly 
focused on the fact that the technology of interaction “causes a trace of the reader [avatar, 
cursor, visual imprint of haptic interaction - AP] to appear onscreen and thus an imprint of them 
in a separate ontological domain” (Bell, Ensslin 2021: 77). In comparison with what happens 
while  reading  the  ambient  literature  (or,  more  generally,  works  that  use  convergent 
interactional metalepsis, with strong emphasis on VR experiences), this seems only symbolic, 
metaphorical breaching of boundaries between the reader’s world and the storyworld.  
In the introduction to the chapter focused on interactional metalepsis, Bell and Ensslin 
   
also  quoted  the  user3  experience  description  (Bell,  Ensslin  2021:  73).  However,  comparing 
this  testimony  (and  its  analysis)  with  the  ones  that  were  references  for  ambient  literature 
project researchers, one can clearly see a slight, but very important difference. Crossing the 
ontological border is in this case still a symbolic act (“”I [...] situated myself as that first person 
view” interpreted by Bell and Ensslin as “deciding to become the avatar” (73)).That is because 
the (let’s call it “early”) theory of interactional metalepsis, reasonably proposed as necessary 
extension of this theoretical approach in context of digital art, is still focused on metaphorical 
presence in the story-world which is definitely not connected with the real one. In other words, 
as Bell and Ensslin stated, the user (reader) need to declare his will to cross the border and 
the way their interact (“via hardware” (73)), although sometimes makes them believe that they 
are in the story world (player “exploring the house” seen as “being inside the storyworld” (73)), 
is still what in cognitive theory is called enacting; it is still based in the act of imagination (that 
would be my interpretation of  the phrase “I sort of situated myself as that first person view” 
(73)). Entering into the storyworld needs to be linked to the act of “stepping into someone’s 
shoes”, adopting his/her perspective and point of view. Of course, in the experience quoted 
by Bell and Ensslin that is also a consequence of using first person narrative, because there 
is no space for the user (reader) theirself in the storyworld. To enter into it, the reader needs 
to become someone else (and this one is seen as an “automatic extension” of experiencing 
“I”), but there is no “real” connection between the reader body and the storyworld. The use of 
second  person  narrative  doesn’t  change  a  lot  (Bell,  Ensslin  2021).  Readers’  gestures  and 
actions  only  permit  a  still  symbolic  presence  of  the  reader  in  the  storyworld,  confirmed  by 
perceived traces of these actions on the screen.  

On the contrary, in ambient literature there is a real space in the storyworld left for the 
reader. He/she doesn't have to enact someone in the storyworld nor to “decide to become” 
someone else. The reader is still himself/herself, with his/her own body, in his/her own ambient 
(which, both, become part of the story). And because of that, people who experienced ambient 
literature works were more focused on the palimpsestic structure of the word, on the fact that 
they could not distinguish the actual (real) world and the storyworld. They didn’t need to think 
about “situating themself” in someone's role; they played themselves. How different from the 
testimonial quoted by Bell and Ensslin is the one cited by Dovey and Hayler: “The thing that, 
maybe, makes it ambient storytelling is that it utilised your universe, what’s surrounding you, 
differently than stories that absolutely ignore who you are and where you’re going...it didn’t 
impose an identity on you which sometimes happens in games [...] It did/t tell you who you 
are. I think that it was immersive, but i[‘]ts strange to be immersive but also be in the place 
where you are” (Dovey, Hayler 2020: 149) 

3 Andy Cambell’s and Judi Alston’s Wallpaper.  

 

The principal aspect of ambient literature works that enhances the metaleptic character 
 
of experience of reading them is the fact that they ask readers to interact in/with their actual 
world. When the  storyworld  is  a  kind  of  palimpsestuous  overlay for the  reader’s reality, the 
reader  doesn’t  need  to  transport  him  in  his  imagination  into  the  storyworld  to  interact,  he 
doesn’t see his/her symbolic extensions on the screen. In Pullinger’s Breathe, when the reader 
moves his screen to unveil the text hidden by ghost, he sees as it is being revealed. His mobile 
phone being hunted by the ghost is part of the story, but the results of this (as well as readers 
reaction to that and the phone itself) are rather part of actuality. In the same work the traces 
of reader’s previous locations (thus real movements in actual world) or images from the actual 
reader  location  are  used  in  ghosts’  monologues  to  create  the  thrilling  impression  that  they 
really know everything about the reader, that they really “see/saw” him, as declared; Similarly, 
in  Semyon  Polyakovsky’s  Maginary,  when  the  reader  walks  in  the  actual  world,  the 
protagonists are tracking (counting) his steps and commenting that it is the reader who needs 
to walk (and it is true that the action, as ironically and repeatedly emphasized by protagonists, 
won’t go ahead till the reader has stepped his 1000 steps)4.  
 

III. 

Sylleptic protagonist 

 

Characterised  permission  for  being  yourself  in  the  story  lead  to  the  very  specific 
construction of textual “You”, which I will call the sylleptic “You”, sylleptic protagonist, applying 
the  Ryszard  Nycz’s  term  sylleptic  “I”  in  a  new  context.  In  ancient  rhetoric  syllepsis  was 
characterised  as  a  figure  of  speech  which  permits  to  break  with  syntactic  rules  in  order  to 
highlight  ambiguity  of  the  word  and  its  ability  of  entering  at  the  same  time  in  two  different, 
contradictory  relations.  Then  it  got  its  modern,  a  little  metaphorical,  reinterpretations.  For 
Derrida syllepsis, when used in a text structure, “cancels the choice between two contradictory 
options”  (Winiecka  2004:  139)  and  makes  both  of  them,  paradoxically,  possible.  Also  in 
Michael Riffaterre’s interpretation syllepsis permits “parallel actualization of both alternatives” 
(139). Ryszard Nycz used this concept to build a typology of modern subjectivity, in which one 
of its types he called sylleptic “I”. As Nycz explains: “The sylleptic I, to put it most simply, is 
the I which has to be understood simultaneously in two ways: namely as true and as fictional, 
as empirical and as textual, as authentic and as fictional-novelic” (Nycz 1995: 386-367). Thus, 
this  kind  of  “I”  is  somehow  fragmented,  dispersed  between  two  realities,  but  not  self-
contradictory,  and  that  is  because  of  the  fact  that  the  relation  between  the  real  “I”  and  the 
literary  “I”  is  interactive  and  interferencial,  they  “mutually  affect  and  exchange  properties” 
(Nycz 1995: 367).  

While  Nycz  used the  trope  of  syllepsis  to  describe  textual  “I” (and  also  to  particular 
strategy of writing (Winiecka 2006: 7)), I will apply this category to the textual “You”, which is 
so  pivotal  for  ambient  literature.  By  sylleptic  “You”  (addressee),  or  more  generally  sylleptic 
protagonist, I mean “You” that belongs to two (entangled) realities, the actual and fictional one, 
and which is not self-contradictory because of that.   

While Nycz’s sylleptic “I” is “being written” (Nycz 1995: 387), sylleptic “You” is being 
spoken to. As a “sylleptic” entity this “You” can belong at the same time to diverse ontological 
worlds and parallelly be (and act) in them. This textual “You” is at the same time the reader of 
flesh and blood, the addressee of the narrative and (more or less) active protagonist in the 

4  Because we  rather  can observe here traces  of the  actual  world in the storyworld, one  could  call  it 
descending  metalepsis.  However,  it  is  not  the  difference  between  ascending  and  descending 
metalepsis what really defines the ambient literature. 

 

storyworld, because - according to the ambient literature concept - the reader and his ambient 
(in various modes) become part of the storyworld. The proposed concept would be similar to 
what Bell and Esslin called mataleptic you (Bell, Ensslin 2021: 222) and could be also seen in 
context  of  Hanebeck’s  category  of  second-person  metalepsis  (Hanebeck  2017)  (although 
such comparison goes beyond the scope of this paper). 

Furthermore, in ambient literature, thanks to its palimpsestic and metaleptic character, 
there is a specific place created (or left) in the story for this sylleptic “You”, for the reader. The 
latter is “physically present within the work” (which responds to it “accordingly”) because “such 
embodied literary experiences bring their reader into contact with a physical location as part 
of a narrative” (Abba, Spencer 2020: 284), what can be seen as similar to breaking the fourth 
wall in theatre or movie. But, as the Pullinger’s Breathe case shows, it needn’t always mean 
that the reader is in the concrete place during the act of reading (this story “uses” for example 
location  API  data  to  make  the  ghost  dialogue  more  appalling:  the  ghost  knows  where  the 
reader had been earlier). In the subsequent part of this paper I will focus on narrative structure 
that has such a “gap” for the real reader (the reader of flesh and blood), for the sylleptic “You”. 
 

IV. 

Embodied spoken monologue  

 

Narrative structure can help in creating enhanced metaleptic character of the story and 
make it easier to the reader to unnoticeably and fluently cross the ontological borders and to 
be in two words at the same time. Dovey, Abba and Pullinger have emphasised the role of 
narrative  techniques  for  immersion  in  ambient  literature  (Dovey,  Abba,  Pullinger  2020:  1), 
underlying the usefulness of second person narrative in this context (14). Also Bell and Ensslin 
appreciate second person narrative as a textual metaleptic device (Bell, Ensslin 2021: 212-
246) and even see textual “you” as “one of, if not the most powerful, linguistic-rhetorical device 
for  digital  fiction  writers  and  developers”  (Bell,  Ensslin  2021:  245).  One  of  the  narration 
structures that makes textual “You” an important element of the story is a spoken monologue 
deeply characterized by Michał Głowiński (Głowiński 1963).   

Spoken monologue was developed in the 1950s in Europe (the model for this narrative 
construction was The Fall by Albert Camus (1956)) and it become popular in 50s and 60s in 
some  countries  (e.g.  France  and  Poland),  especially  for  literature  of  intellectual  reckoning, 
influenced by existentialism and philosophy of the absurd5. In modern times, along with the 
growing popularity of interactive storytelling and second person narration, it is again in play. I 
will  use  this  concept  to characterize  one  of the ambient  literature  frequently  used  narrative 
structures. 

Spoken  monologue  is  “paradoxically  dialogical”  (Głowiński  called  it  also  “one-sided 
dialog” (Głowiński 1963: 236, 237)). It means that, even the addressee (textual “you”) cannot 
answer, the speaking “I” constantly behaves as if he/she were there, including reacting to the 
“given”  responses  (they  are  known,  because  the  speaking  “I”  repeats  them  while 
commenting)6.  The speaking “I” not only addresses its monologue to this textual “You”, but 
there are also traces of this “you” in the text; this “you” has its own role to play. The specific 
construction of spoken monologue that provokes, invites the reader to substitute textual “You” 

 

5 Wolf Schmid calls similar but lacking the ideological themes and the intellectual 
argumentation structure a dialogic narrative monologue (Schmidt 2010: 87). 
6 What Głowiński had called the “mute partner of the conversation” Richardson later described as a 
figure of interlocutor (Richardson 2006). 

with themself, to become him/her is called by Głowiński the “method of invocation” (Głowiński 
1963: 238). 

In “embodied reading” of ambient literature this “substitution” loses its metaphorical, 
symbolic  character.  Spoken  monologue  takes  the  form  of  embodied  spoken  monologue  in 
which the “you” is substituted by the real reader of flesh and blood. The ambient literature work 
seen from that perspective becomes a literary work in form of the “score” (Bogalecki 2020) in 
which there is a special role for the reader; it seems a kind of performance (Abba, Spencer 
2020: 290).  

Vivid example of that can be Janet Cardiff’s Her Long Black Hair, a locative audio walk 
with pictures. The speaking “I” in this case not only creates an imaginary relation with “you”, 
but also places the “gap” for the reader in the actual reality, mushing up two ontological levels. 
It is hard to maintain that the meeting of speaking “I” and listening-to “you” is only fictional and 
imaginary, because if it hadn’t happened, how would the reader have had the real material 
picture in his hand? Because in Her Long Black Hair  the “gap” for the reader is (re)located 
into  the  actual  world,  because  it  is  moved  from  the  text  to  the  reality  (what  is  the  nub  of 
embodiment of spoken monologue   structure), the reader can act as a sylleptic you. In the 
structure of story and narrative the “you” is the one who really acts in the actual  world, who 
holds the pictures and looks at them, guided by the speaking “I”. 

  Similarly,  in  Dzieje  jednego  pocisku  by  Marta  Dziedziela  and  Szymon  Szul7,  the 
reader-listener’s phone on which he/she listens, reads and watches the story is the element 
that links two ontological dimensions. It is a permanent point of reference for both, the textual 
“I” (or “I-s”, because there is more than one speaking “I” in this story) and the textual “You”. 
The speaking “I” comments on how old (from his future perspective) this phone is and asks to 
“acknowledge location” with it. From the beginning of the story it is clear that the mobile phone 
will  be  an  instrument  of communication  between  the  reader-listener  and the  protagonist(s); 
this “pact”  is  an  important  element  of the  story  (as the reader  has their mission to realise). 
Thus, for the reader-listener his mobile phone is the “metaleptic machine” (Ryan 2007) that 
converges two worlds, similarly as were the photos in case of Cardiff’s work8.  

So, to sum it up, in ambient literature there is no avatar offered to become him/her. 
Instead, the stories lent the reader’s body and thanks to that offer this paradoxical (sylleptic) 
experience of being here and there at the same time (Hayler 2020: 93), experience in which - 
palimpsestuously - different ontological layers are entangled. As the real body, the reader of 
flesh and blood to whom the textual “I” speaks, is conditio sine qua non for this, I propose to 
call this narrative structure embodied spoken monologue. 
  

V.  Conclusions: the reader of flesh and blood enclosed in the story 

 
Described narrative address is frequently used in ambient writing. But it is not the only 
one option, even if it is the most natural, intuitive and simple one. The palimpsestic structure 
of the world, metaleptic overlapping of real and story worlds, and sylleptic structure of reader-
protagonist  can 
fruitfully  nourish  another  kind(s)  of  narrative  structure(s).  Semyon 
Polyakovsky’s  Maginary  is  a  perfect  example  here.  This  catchy  story  (which,  similarly  to 
Pullinger’s  Breathe,  is  linked  to  the  particular  one  space  and  location:  the  one  its  reader 
inhabits) is written in third person narrative (and because of that it would be hard to analyse 

 

7 See: https://stars.library.ucf.edu/elo2020/asynchronous/panels/1/ 
8 Bell and Ensslin talk here about “acting as a conduit rather than as an ontological barrier” (Bell, 
Ensslin 2021: 107). 

this work with categories like second person metalepsis or metaleptic you). However, one of 
its protagonists is the sylleptic one.  

Maginary  conjures  up  one  of  canonical  metaleptic  literary  texts,  “The  Continuity  of 
Parks” by Julio Cortázar. It’s reader, exactly as the reader in Cortázar’s short-story, is reading 
about  a  reader  that  is  reading  what  he/she  is  reading.  There  is  of  course  one  (slight  but 
important and meaningful) difference - no one is sitting on the green armchair and no one is 
holding a paper book in his hands. This time, the reader discovers that in the story he/she is 
reading on his/her screen, there is a protagonist who is reading the same screen. And this 
protagonist is the one that has the name of the proper reader, the one he/she had used to sign 
the  e-book,  just  before  (not  so  metaphorical)  entering  into  the  storyworld.  Polyakovskiy 
proposes a very intriguing narrative structure in which we are reading about us like about the 
Other, in the third person narrative. And at the same time we can observe how our real actions 
have an impact on the story world (as in the example of steps mentioned previously) and we 
are a sylleptic protagonist of the story, even though we are not its addressee. 

In  ambient  literature  mobile  phones  (and  sometimes  material  books)  become  what 
Marie-Laurie Ryan called “metaleptic machines” (Ryan 2006). While fifteen years ago she was 
sure that the actual world “remains protected from metaleptic phenomena” (209), the deeply 
embodied  reading  proposed  in  ambient  literature  shows  that  the  overlapping  and 
amalgamation of actual and virtual world in a literary experience is possible. In 2006 Ryan was 
dreaming about possible “metaleptic” future of VR experiences and actual literary production 
(including  VR  literature) has  shown that the  whole  reader  body,  as  well  as  the  reader,  can 
become part of the story and not only be used as a reading machine, a tool, kind of virtual 
extension that enables the reader non-trivial effort needed in ergodic reading practices.   

In narrative of palimpsestic and metaleptic works of ambient literature, which I called 
embodied spoken monologue, there is a special “gap” left for the reader; for the reader of flesh 
and blood (not the virtual one), who becomes the sylleptic protagonist of the story. Because 
“ambient  literature  seeks  to  make  work  that  responds  to  the  presence  of  a  reader”(  Abba, 
Spencer 2020: 278), the readers' bodies are in this case a kind of “play button” for the whole 
experience. So, as was stated, ambient stories propose the new pact with the reader; they 
declare: “Dear Reader, lend me your body, and then I will show you my story”. And because 
bodies are different, ambient literature works “by their nature, offer unique experiences to each 
reader” (Marcinkowski 2020: 199).  

 

 
Bibliography 
 
Primary references: 
Cardiff Janet, Her Long Black Hair 
Dziedziela Marta, Szul Szymon, Dzieje jednego pocisku  
Polyakovsky, Semyon Maginary 
Pullinger Kate, Breathe 
 
Secondary references: 
Abba  Tom,  Dovey  Jonathan,  Pullinger  Kate  (2020).  “Introduction”.  In:  Abba  Tom,  Dovey 
Jonathan,  Pullinger  Kate  (eds.)  (2020).  “Ambient  Literature.  Towards  a  New  Poetics  of 
Situated Writing and Reading Practices”, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan  
Abba Tom, Spencer Amy (2020). “Writing Ambient Literature”. In: Abba Tom, Dovey Jonathan, 
Pullinger Kate (eds.) (2020). “Ambient Literature. Towards a New Poetics of Situated Writing 

and Reading Practices”, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan  
Bell Alice (2016).”Interactiona Metalepsis and Unnatural Narratology”. Narrative 24, no 3 
Bell  Alice,  Ensslin  Astrid  (2021).  “Digital  Fiction  andt  the  Unnatural  Transmedia  Narrative 
Theory, Method, and Analysis. Columbus: The Ohio State University Press 
Bogalecki  Piotr.  2020.  “Wiersze-partytury  w  poezji  polskiej  neoawangardy”.  Kraków: 
Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Jagiellońskiego 
Dovey, Hayler 2020: “Critical Ambience”. In: Abba Tom, Dovey Jonathan, Pullinger Kate (eds.) 
(2020).  “Ambient  Literature.  Towards  a  New  Poetics  of  Situated  Writing  and  Reading 
Practices”, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan  
Ensslin  Astrid,  Rice  Caarla,  Riley  Sarah,  Wilks  Christine,  Perram  Megan,  Fowlie  Hannah, 
Munro Lauren, Bailey K. Alysse (2020). “Bodies in E-lit”. In Grigar Dene, O’Sullivan James 
(eds.)  (2020).  “Electronic  Literature  as  Digital  Humanities.  Context,  Forms,  and  Practices”. 
New York: Bloomsbury Academic 
Fludernik Monika (2003). “Scene Shift, Metalepsis, and the Metaleptic Mode”. Style 37, no. 4 
Głowiński Michał (1963). “Narracja jako monolog wypowiedziany”, In: Budzyk Karol (1963). “Z 
teorii i historii literatury”. Wrocław: Ossolineum  
Górska-Olesińska Monika, Przybyszewska Agnieszka (2020). “O „wypożyczaniu” ciał 
odbiorców na potrzeby (nie tylko literackich) immersyjnych wędrówek po przestrzeniach 
pamięci”. Przegląd Kulturoznawczy, no. 2  
Hanebeck  Julian  (2017).  “Understanding  Metalepsis:  The  Hermeneutics  of  Narrative 
Transgression”. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter 
Hayler  Matt  (2020).  “Objects,  Places,  and  Entanglements.  In:  Abba  Tom,  Dovey  Jonathan, 
Pullinger Kate (eds.) (2020) “Ambient Literature. Towards a New Poetics of Situated Writing 
and Reading Practices”, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan  
Kukkonen Karin (2011). “Metalepsis in Popular Culture: An Introduction”. In Kukkonen Karin, 
Klimek Sonia (eds.) (2011). “Metalepsis in Popular Culture. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter 
Marcinkowski 2020. In: Abba Tom, Dovey Jonathan, Pullinger Kate (eds.). “Ambient Literature. 
Towards  a  New  Poetics  of  Situated  Writing  and  Reading  Practices”,  Switzerland:  Palgrave 
Macmillan  
Nycz Ryszard (1995). “Traces of ‘I’: Concepts of Subjectivity in Polish Literature of the Last 
Century” (trans. Nash Alice, Haltof Marek). Canadian Slavonic Papers / Revue Canadienne 
Des Slavistes, vol. 37, no. 3/4 
Przybyszewska  Agnieszka  (2020).  “W  stronę  lokacyjnego  monologu  wypowiedzianego.  O 
eksplorowaniu literackich ucieleśnionych przestrzeni pamięci”. Przegląd Kulturoznawczy, no. 
2 
Richardson Brian (2006). Unnatural Voices: Extreme Narration in Modern and Contemporary 
Fiction. Columbus: The Ohio State University Press 
Ryan Marie-Laurie. 2006. “Avatars of Story” Minneapolis:: University of Minnesota Press 
Schmidt Wolf (2010). “Narratology. An Introduction” (trans. A. Starritt). Berlin: Walter de 
Gruyter 
Whittaker Emma (2020). “An Aesthetics of Ambient Literature; Experience, Narrative, Design”. 
In: Abba Tom, Dovey Jonathan, Pullinger Kate (eds.) (2020). “Ambient Literature. Towards a 
New Poetics of Situated Writing and Reading Practices”, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan  
Winiecka Elżbieta (2004). “O sylleptyczności tekstu literackiego”. Pamiętnik Literacki, no. 4 
Winiecka  Elżbieta  (2006).  “Białoszewski  sylleptyczny”.  Poznań:  Poznańskie  Studia 
Polonistyczne 
 

