The country and the platform, or the issue of nanofundia 

Agustín Berti 

 
Abstract 
This  paper  discusses  the  issue  of  the  platformization  of  culture  from  a  Latin-American 
perspective. The issue of latifundia and the consolidation of vast productive land a very 
reduced  minority  of  wealthy  elites  has  been  one  of  the  distinctive  traits  of  lasting 
inequalities in Latin-American countries. And the diaspora of migrants to the slums of major 
cities has been a defining trait of the 20th century. This has seemingly nothing to do with 
digital  culture,  and  yet  this  paper  will  stress  the  links  between  the  reprimarization  of 
production  in  the  developing  world  and  the  digital  extractivism  of  platform  economy 
described by Pasquinelli and Joler (2020) in order to assess the consolidation of culture 
enhanced by digital technologies. Such consolidation goes well beyond the scope described 
in Adorno and Horkheimer’s definition of cultural industry, since everything digitized con 
be treated as “digital content”.  

Drawing  from  previous  work  on  the  ontology  of  digital  objects  (Blanco  &  Berti, 
2016),  and  my  critique  of  “content  dynamics”  (Berti,  2015).  Platforms  strive  on  the 
automated  algorithmic administration  of  access  and  reproduction  of  creative  works  (be 
they text, sound, video, o code-based). The common trait of current platform culture is the 
maximization of profit by means of garnering data and attention in order to capture more 
attention (and more data). My claim is that this data extactivism is enabled by the ability to 
treat  artistic  works  as  interchangeable  digital  content.  It  is  a form  of  standardization  of 
cultural production akin to that of nature into agricultural parceled land. The emergence of 
corporate  cultural  platforms  has  led  to  an  unprecedented  concentration  of  media  and 
cultural production ownership that flourished in the platform ecosystem that the COVID-19 
pandemic has once accelerated, configuring what I will discusses as the specific form of 
primitive accumulation in digitized societies. A phenomenom well characterized by Snricek 
(2017),  platform  economy  is  the  way  of  capturing  surplus  value  in  the  age  of  digital 
connection.  

In previous shared research (Berti, 2015, Ré & Berti, 2021; Ré, Costa, Célis Bueno & 
Berti, 2020), I have explored the attempts to obstruct digital addressability in electronic 
literature  and  digital  arts  as  a  reaction  to  the  extraction  of  surplus  by  means  of  the 
normalization of content. My partial assessment is that these aesthetic strategies provide 
examples of resistance rather than an alternative model of digital (and platform) culture. 
Meanwhile corporate media has advance towards the consolidation of actual nanofundia 
characterized  by  the  massive  purchased  of  copyrights  and  of  infrastructure  ownership, 
strategically located in the global North.  Taking on from Williams (1973) classical study of 
English literature, if there is to be a politics of electronic literature, the class struggle will be 
located on the servers and the protocols. Expanding Jameson’s concept of a “geopolitical 
aesthetics” (2018), if there is to be a geopolitics of electronic literature, the struggles will 
be about national and regional digital infraestructures and the local regulations over the 
globalized  attention  economies.  The  problem  is  about  how  much  can  we  tolerate  the 
expansion of cultural nanofundia. 
Keywords: platforms, digital content, national literatures, neo-extractivism. 
 
1.  On Nanofundia 
The issue of latifundia and the consolidation of vast productive land a very reduced minority 
of  wealthy  elites  has  been  one  of  the  distinctive  traits  of  lasting  inequalities  in  Latin-
American countries. And the diaspora of migrants to the slums of major cities has been a 
defining trait of the 20th century. This has seemingly nothing to do with digital culture, and 
yet  this  paper  will  stress  the  links  between  the  reprimarization  of  production  in  the 
developing world and the digital extractivism of platform economy described by Pasquinelli 
and Joler (2020) in order to assess the tendencies of consolidation of culture in oligopolies 
(mostly the GAFA but some other minor players as well) enhanced by digital technologies. 
Such  consolidation  goes  well  beyond  the  scope  described  in  Adorno  and  Horkheimer’s 
definition of cultural industry, since everything digitized can be treated as “digital content”. 
The issue I want to present in this paper is that corporate media has advanced towards the 
consolidation of actual nanofundia characterized by the massive purchase of copyrighted 
collections  of  works  and  contents  and  of  infrastructure  ownership,  strategically  located 

(and  managed  from)  in  the  global  North.  Drawing  inspiration  from  Raymond  Williams’ 
(1973) classical study of English literature on the relations between economic modes of 
production  and  literature,  I  would  like  to  present  the  case  of  contemporary  platform 
capitalism as a form of land ownership. To do so I have to make several counterintuitive 
claims. (Although some of them may be obvious to some, they are necessary nonetheless):  
First, digital culture is not a process of dematerialization and ubiquity but rather, one of 
miniaturization and acceleration.  
Second, miniaturization makes way for large economies of scale based on data collection 
and processing. 
Third, such data collection is allowed by infrastructures of networks and servers operating 
according to protocols which are a form of standardization (that is, of mathematization of 
the world). 
Fourth, digital reproducibility of cultural forms reduces them to unspecific forms of digital 
content. (Such process has been deemed as convergence culture, the implications of this 
assessment are not politically neutral to say the least).  
Fifth, “convergence culture” has expanded author and copyright based ideas of culture. 
Sixth,  the  platform  capitalism  stage  of  20th  century  cultural  industry  depends  on  the 
corporate control of huge collections of digitized and digital content of cultural entities 
formerly known as works (of art, literature, science or knowledge). 
This brings us to the issue of nanofundia. Basic economic power now not only resides in the 
control of land from the extraction of mineral, vegetal and animal resources, but also in the 
miniaturized  landscape  of  information,  that  is,  on  servers.  Contrary  to  what  it  may  be 
expected,  the  cost  of  IA  and  large  databases  makes  nanofundia  a  digital  equivalent  of 
latifundia, rather than a tiny form of minifundia. 
So, my claim is that server farms are a form of land ownership. And, if there is to be a 
politics  of  electronic  literature,  class  struggle  will  be  located  on  the  servers  and  the 
protocols. 
 

2.  The issue of latifundia in Latin-American Literature 

“The men in former days believed that above all moderation should 
be observed in landholding, for indeed it was their judgment that it 
was better to sow less and plough more intensively. Virgil, too, I see 
agreed with this view. To confess the truth, the latifundia have ruined 
Italy, and soon will ruin the provinces as well. Six owners were in 
possession of half of the province of Africa at the time when the 
Emperor Nero had them put to death”  
-Pliny’s Natural History, 18.7.35. 

 
Latifundia as a mode of production has a long history in Western societies. Accumulated 
from the spoils of war, confiscated from conquered peoples, it can be traced as early as the 
2nd  century  before  Christ.  Though  modern  Europe  has  modified  the  structure  of 
landownership,  it  is  still  one  of  the  defining  traits  of  Latin  American  societies  (and  it’s 
inequalities),  with  white  class  elites  of  European  descent  owning  most  of  the  most 
productive  land  in  each  country.  Such  model  has  been  deemed  both  as  economically 
inefficient and as socially regressive. The opposition to such land concentration has come 
in the form of agrarian reform in two ways: either by redistribution or by modernization.   
Just to name an example of the persistence of this issue, in 1969 Tizon’s experimental novel 
Fire in Casabindo used modernist narrative alongside ancient oral narrative techniques to 
depict the peasant and native American population struggles over land ownership in the 
Argentinean northern provinces in the late 19th century, a conflict that is still ongoing well 
into the 21st century. The expansion of the agricultural border for transgenic soy extraction 
and the exploitation of gold and lithium mineral reserves (crucial for the existence of digital 
culture) has only deepened these conflicts over land ownership. This is not the place to 
comment on the vast critical tradition on the impact of latifundia on Argentine culture (and, 
especially, literature), as there is on Colombian, Brazilian, Mexican and Peruvian literature  
as  well  (only  to  name  he  few  I  am  somewhat  familiar  with),  but  I  would  like  to  draw 
attention on the fact that during the 19th and 20th centuries Latin American literature has 

repeatedly looked into the relation between the question of national identities vis-a-vis 
cosmopolitanism and restaged the ongoing tensions between the country and the city, a 
opposition that, as Williams very well contends, is far from being as linear or as clear a 
dichotomy as it is usually presented.  
 
3.  Platforms as Plantations: Nanofundia 
As Nick Snricek (2017) has pointed out, there is a shift on internet economy which is not as 
new as it seems. Current consolidation is but another iteration of what Marx characterized 
original accumulation. That is, the extraction of surplus that has pervaded the concentration 
of landownership in fewer hands and, later on, the ownership of machines. Oligopolistic 
tendencies  are  nothing  new  and  platforms  are  just  its  current  form.  For  the  sake  of 
argument, let me draw some parallels between early village entrepreneurs and internet 
entrepreneurs. Prior to the dot com bubble burst, the technoptimism about cyberculture 
was thriving on the internet as a space for freedom. But what kind (or kinds) of freedom? 
1.  Most notably, a sense of freedom from the constraints of the physical world, the 
illusion of dematerialization which fed all the convergence tropes and that I have 
discussed  as  the  digitization  of  culture  as  a  “dynamic  of  contents”  (Berti  2015). 
Eventually, the enhanced copyright enforcement and the accumulation of collection 
in  fewer  hands  has  led  to  what  Striphas  (2011)  has  defined  as  “controlled 
consumerism”, one of the distinctive traits of nanofundia. 

2.  The hails of democratization and actual freedom of speech of course, only to be 
subdued by surveillance capitalism as the Snowden revelations would make clear. 
What  we  actually  gained  was  “freedom”  of  input,  which  led  to  massive  data-
collection  and  what  Pasquinelli  and  Joler  (2020)  have denounced  as “knowledge 
extractivism”. 

3.  The  promise  of  universal  accessibility,  only  to  end  up  stratified  by  premium 
accounts  and  paywalls,  where  the  internet  actually  is  mirror-world  of  material 
inequalities. 

4.  The siren chants of optimization and rationalization, illustrated by the growth of 
precarious 
in  “lean 
platforms” (Snricek  2017)  fueled  by  biker  blood  and  “collaborators”  own  cars  or 
homes. 

loss  of  work  rights,  that  ends  up 

labor  and  the 

Today  some  people  yearn  the  “non-commercial”  internet  that  fascinated  the  world 
between 1993 and 2001. But, just as Williams has pointed out about the idealization of a 
rural past, older people were then longing for the BBS [Bulletin Board System] and its local, 
face-to-face, communities of users. But then again, back then, some may also have also 
been missing the good ole days of ARPANET, with no cyberpunks or yuppies, and so on.  

Some had hoped that the Internet was a new country, or a newfoundland to begin 
society anew, such utopianism ended up crashing against a Wall… street. Financial capital 
rushed to  invest  liquidity  in the  start-ups.  And Patriot  Acts  started policing  those  green 
pastures. The internet, just as Williams’ rural Britain, came to the Age of Enclosures (and a 
brief battle for the survival of the Commons). It took music almost a quarter of a century to 
migrate form a closed industrialized product (that is the sale of CDs) to the management of 
streaming  flows  (by  premium  accounts  and  advertising),  editorial  houses  went  down  a 
similar road, as well as film and television industries. In the end, culture did not get freer, a 
flow  of  information,  it  just  got  coded  in  nanoscopic  inscriptions  and  light-speed  fast, 
harvested in copyright holders’ server farms.  

There is a striking similiarity between server farms and soy beans, the ever-growing 
efficiency in the extraction of surplus out of the plows of arable land mimic those of the 
hard drive tracks. The analogy stops working in solid state drives but I assume you get the 
point. Literary, artistic, scientific and other cultural “works” are coded into digital contents. 
Just as plantation slave and peasant workers, works are migrated (note the stress on the 
passive voice). 
 
4.  Cultural Extractivism and the Reprimarization of the Global South 
The main point of this intervention is political. Under the modernizing imaginaries of digital 
cultures there is nothing more than a form of good old colonialism. Pasquinelli and Joler 

presented (2020) Patern Recognition and IA as an instrument, a magnification tool, as the 
telescope and the microscope. But, as current copyright over COVID-19 vaccines painfully 
shows, no instrument of knowledge is ever neutral. The nooscope actually strengthens the 
positions held by the copyright owners in the digital landscape, that is, the nanofundists. 
The  is  a  breeding,  underlying  class  struggle,  the  unstable,  precarious  labour  of  the 
cognitariat, the freelancers (yet another form of work traced by Williams) and the precariat.  
Argentine e-lit also illustrates this issue, the disputes over ownership took place between 
Boirges’ widow and Pablo Katchadjian over his El Aleph engordado [Fattened Aleph]. He had 
previously  subverted  the  national  poem,  Martín  Fierro  by  alphabetically  rearranging  its 
7165 verses. Let me suggest here that verses are another form of plow, by which que can 
harvest language. This is not the place to discuss this but it has received critical attention 
(Kozak  2018, 2019; Berti 2016). 
 
5.  Towards a geopolitics of electronic literature: Going beyond r3$1$t! and un4dr3$$!  
The relation between platforms and e-literature in general, and to Latin American e-lit, in 
particular cannot be properly understood without contrasting it to the global flows of goods 
and information (and goods as information). The current role of developing countries as 
source of commodities, cheap input and cheap data processing expresses global design led 
by the global North. There are many ways to contend such geopolitical inequalities. Thus, if 
there is to be a politics of electronic literature, the political debate will have to take a stance 
on the servers and the protocols which are the way land is distributed in the digital realm. 
Expanding  Jameson’s  concept  of  a  “geopolitical  aesthetics”  (2018),  if  there  is  to  be  a 
geopolitics of electronic literature, the struggles will be about national and regional digital 
infraestructures  and  the  local  regulations  over  the  globalized  attention  economies.  The 
problem is about how much can we tolerate the expansion of cultural nanofundia. 
 
With Anahí Ré (Ré y Berti 2018, 2020; Ré, Costa, Célis Bueno y Berti 2020) we have 
proposed the term of unadressability as a poetics for intervening the workings of the code 
to render it useless for the algorithmic administration which is at the heart of platform 
capitalism. The limits of is that such artistic procedure is that is a resistance tactic rather 

than a sustainable strategy for technical, cultural and political equality. My intuition is that 
e-lit is a fertile ground for developing forms of digital culture other than platform capitalism, 
towards a fairer redistribution of digital space, that is, a politic and an aesthetic for the 
nanocommons.  
 
References 
Berti, A. (2015) From Digital to Analog. Agrippa and Other Hybrids in the Beginnings of 
Digital Culture. Peter Lang Publishers, New York. 
Berti, A. (2016) El uso de acervos textuales digitalizados en la creación literaria - 
Humanidades Digitales. Construcciones locales en contextos globales. I Congreso 
Internacional de la Asociación Argentina de Humanidades Digitales - Ponencia - 
UBA/AADH. Buenos Aires, noviembre 2016. Ponencia.  
Jameson, F. (2018). La estética geopolítica: Cine y espacio en el sistema mundial. 
Barcelona: Paidós 
Kozak, C. (2019). Derivas literarias digitales: (des)encuentros entre experimentalismo y 
flujos culturales masivos. Heterotopías, 2(3). Recuperado a partir de 
https://revistas.unc.edu.ar/index.php/heterotopias/article/view/24768 
Kozak, C. (2018) Comunidades experimentales y literatura digital en Latinoamérica, Virtualis 
Vol. 
17 
https://www.revistavirtualis.mx/index.php/virtualis/article/view/272/270  
Ré, A. & Berti, A. (2020) La d3$r3f(x) comme opération technique de résistance esthétique-
politique chez quelques artistes de l’Amérique Latine. [ad referendum] 
Ré, A.; Costa, F.; Célis Bueno, C. y Berti, A. (2020) Escrituras algorítmicas e imágenes 
invisibles:  Tecnoestética  y  política,  Pensando.  Revista  de  filosofía,  Vol.11,  n.24, 
Setembro-Dezembro 2020, pp.41-53 
Ré, A. & Berti, A. (2018) Estándar y poéticas industriales en la literatura digital argentina - 
A contracorriente 16.1, Fall 2018, pp. 100-127. 
Snricek, N. (2017) Platform capitalism. Cambridge, UK: Polity, 
Williams, R. (1973). The country and the city. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Núm. 

9, 

