 

On Reading and Being Read in the Pandemic: Software, Interface, and The Endless 
Doomscroller 
 
Ben Grosser 
School of Art + Design 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA 
https://bengrosser.com 
 
 
Introduction 
For years now, the modern smartphone has provided comfort and distraction during breaks 
or interruptions in the flow of time (Mowlabocus). But perhaps no moment in modern 
history has provided such widespread and coordinated breaks in that flow as the early 
COVID-19 pandemic. A time marked by government-mandated shutdowns of non-essential 
activities, many found themselves working and/or going to school from home, with travel 
and entertainment plans indefinitely postponed. Further, the period created acute needs for 
new knowledge, as well as additional desires for comfort and reassurance in the face of 
global uncertainty. 
 
Eagerly awaiting anyone who reached for their phones in these moments were the social 
media sites, spaces which a majority of US adults report they are likely to get news from 
(Shearer). But these platforms aren’t designed to inform their users with the best, most 
accurate information. Instead, they are optimized to engage them (Levy, 301). And while 
humans were already predisposed to react more strongly to negative news stories before 
the pandemic arrived (Soroka)—the expression “if it bleeds, it leads” comes to mind 
(Pooley)—then a global existential crisis around a once-in-a-century pandemic is likely to 
have heightened that predisposition. 
 
At the heart of this exchange between users seeking information and comfort and social 
media systems providing a response is the act of reading. Users read posts from their friends 
and follows on an infinitely-scrolling algorithmically-generated and personalized “feed.” In 
turn, the platforms read the users, analyzing their every recordable action for clues about 
what the system should provide next to keep that user on the platform, continuing to scroll 
and “like” and post.  
 
This combination of algorithmic social media feeds, a populace largely stuck online, new 
gaps in the flow of time, heightened global anxiety, and an uncontrolled pandemic produced 
a perfect storm of excessive bad news reading. This storm often left users stuck in the scroll, 
“unable to disrupt [their] own behavior” (Lovink, 78). The activity became so pervasive that 
it gained a new term called “doomscrolling.”  
 
This paper examines the material at the heart of doomscrolling: software. Software sets the 
“conditions of possibility” for its users, necessitating careful examination of its smallest 
components (Fuller, 2). Software and networks compel habits that turn users into machines, 
“neoliberal subjects … that are always searching, rarely finding” (Chun, 17). Contemporary 
software interfaces hide user datafication that structures user action, making it important to 
“cut up and take apart” these machines that read us as much as we read them (Andersen 

 

1 

and Pold, 72). This is followed by a discussion of the author’s net art / e-lit project, an 
alternative software interface called The Endless Doomscroller. Through its distilling of social 
media and news headlines down to their barest most generalized phrases and interface 
conventions, The Endless Doomscroller asks viewers to consider why social media users can’t 
look away from the scroll, who most benefits from this new compulsive behavior, and what 
art can reveal about reading and being read in this digital and pandemic age. 
 
 
Social Media Platforms, Interstitial Time, and the Emergence of Doomscrolling 

 

“IT’S 11:37 PM and the pattern shows no signs of shifting. At 1:12 am, it’s more of the 
same. Thumb down, thumb up. Twitter, Instagram, and—if you’re feeling particularly 
wrought/masochistic—Facebook. Ever since the Covid-19 pandemic left a great many 
people locked down in their homes in early March, the evening ritual has been 
codifying: Each night ends the way the day began, with an endless scroll through 
social media in a desperate search for clarity.” — Angela Watercutter, Wired, 25 
June, 2020 

 
Though the pandemic has been a monetary disaster for many, with record-setting job losses 
and other economic indicators frequently earning it the title of “worst [downturn] since the 
great depression” (Zumbrun), not everyone has suffered equally in this period. Alongside 
tech sector neighbors such as Amazon and Zoom, the pandemic has been good for the social 
media platforms. Facebook’s stock price rose by 23% in 2020 (Trefis). Twitter’s Q4 2020 
revenue was up 28% over the previous year (Conger). And platform CEO wealth has followed 
suit, with, for example, Mark Zuckerberg’s personal wealth increasing by $40 billion USD in 
the last year (Kneuven).  
 
In some ways the pandemic came at an opportune time for the social media giants. Facing 
continued scrutiny ever since the 2016 US presidential election, the platforms welcomed an 
opportunity to highlight a positive role they could play within a locked-down society. But 
although Facebook, Twitter, and others have indeed provided opportunities for digital 
connection during these times of social distancing, the era hasn’t sparked any significant 
reconsideration of the platforms’ core design constraints. They are still focused on key 
metrics such as monthly active users (MAUs) at Facebook or monetizable daily active users 
(mDAU) at Twitter. They still optimize their feeds for engagement (Levy, 413). Their focus 
remains on growth, as their profit continues to come not from genuine user-to-user 
connection but from the value of data they extract from users under surveillance capitalism 
(Zuboff). 
 
One key to this growth has been the expansion of “interstitial time,” temporal breaks in the 
normal flow when so many reached for their digital devices. These increased gaps have 
made possible new opportunities for “mindless scrolling” that becomes “meditative” 
(Mowlabocus) and a “distraction from uncertainty” in the face of “existential anxiety” 
(Hassan). The combinations that arose from these factors—increases in stress, breaks in the 
normal flow of time, social media feeds used as a source of news, feed algorithms optimized 
to increase engagement metrics, and a hunger for information in the face of often confusing 
government messaging (Feldman)—all gave rise to a condition that came to be called 
“doomscrolling.” 

 

2 

 

 
Doomscrolling refers to the ways in which people have found themselves regularly—and in 
some cases, almost involuntarily—scrolling bad news headlines on their phone, often for 
hours each night in bed when they had meant to be sleeping. Kevin Roose, writing in the 
New York Times in March of 2020, described the condition as “falling into deep, morbid 
rabbit holes filled with coronavirus content, agitating myself to the point of physical 
discomfort, erasing any hope of a good night’s sleep” (Roose). Wired characterized it as a 
“roll toward annihilation,” where each person “watches the demise of so much, while also 
slowly destroying themselves” (Watercutter).  
 
Unquestionably the realities of the pandemic necessitated a level of vigilance for the 
purposes of personal safety. But doomscrolling wasn’t just a natural reaction to the news of 
the day—it was and continues to be the result of a perfect yet evil marriage between a 
populace stuck online, social media interfaces designed to game and hold our attention, and 
the realities of an uncontrolled crisis. Yes, it may be hard to look away from bad news in any 
format, but it is nearly impossible to avert our eyes when that news is endlessly presented 
via designed-to-be-addictive social media interfaces that know just what to show us next in 
order to keep us engaged. 
 
 
Infinite Scroll, the Doomscrolling Metainterface, and the User as WHILE Loop 
A primary interface mechanism central to doomscrolling is the infinite scroll. An interface 
paradigm common amongst sites with some kind of algorithmic feed (e.g., search, streaming 
content, and social media sites), infinite scroll is an asynchronous, dynamic loading 
mechanism that fetches new data as a user scrolls, and “reduces or eliminates page breaks 
within the interface” (Monteiro). Key to the user experience of infinite scroll is that the page 
they are browsing never appears to end. As they approach the bottom of the page, the site 
detects that condition and appends new material below it. A key aim of the infinite scroll is 
to remove interface “friction,” to transform the mindful action of page navigation “into a 
homogenous, seamless” and repetitive behavior (Lorusso). 
 
Any time a corporate software interface employs interaction techniques aimed at reducing 
friction is a moment that warrants further study, especially when that technique obscures 
the visibility of a vast infrastructure behind the scenes. Andersen and Pold theorize and 
name the object produced through such obscuration (and other tactics) as a “metainterface” 
(Andersen and Pold). To distance the user from these hidden layers of computation and 
data, metainterfaces employ techniques such as “minimalist hiding, e.g., the hiding of the 
datafication, monitoring and profiling going on in cloud computing infrastructures behind its 
immediate, minimalist user-interface” (Pold). Such distancing blurs the interdependence of 
user-directed consumption and use (e.g., reading posts on a social network feed) with 
system-directed consumption and use (e.g., the social network’s reading of user behavior 
and preference through surveillance-based data analysis of that user’s every action) 
(Andersen and Pold, 71-72). This kind of “double-sided reading” is characteristic of the 
metainterface, and a key mechanism driving not only surveillance capitalism at the heart of 
social media (Andersen and Pold, 96), but also the habit of doomscrolling. 
 

 

3 

In other words, when we read news on a social media platform, the platform reads us back. 
And the aim of the system’s reading is to predict what content we are most likely to 
consume next, a prediction gained through “processes of monitoring, quantifying, and 
calculating consumption in controlled environments that can predict general behaviors” 
(Andersen and Pold, 72). Through its commodification of “reading, language, and the user’s 
body” (Andersen and Pold, 125) this prediction serves the platform’s ultimate goal of 
increased engagement.  
 
A key way this double-sided reading combines with social media’s infinite scroll—and the 
anxiety inherent to uncontrolled pandemic—is to transform the human’s act of reading 
away from one of navigation (of concepts, paths, narratives, etc.) toward a sort of looping 
consumption of negative headlines. Unable to stop the cycle, the doomscrolling 
metainterface reprograms the user into habitual repetition (Chun, 69). Interestingly, this 
habit ends up resembling a key concept from computer programming called WHILE. (Hou Je 
Bek, 182) WHILE is a code execution loop that runs indefinitely until its stop condition 
evaluates as true. Before the pandemic, a social media reader’s stop condition (in the face 
of an infinitely scrolling feed) might have been when bored or has something else to 
do. But in the early months of the pandemic, faced with an interface feeding anxious users 
endless messages that amplified their fear, the stop condition became when no longer 
anxious OR when nothing left to read. Infinite scroll ensured the latter option was 
never true, while the system’s behavioral analysis ensured the former condition would never 
be reached. Users became stuck in a never-ending loop. As a result, the practical stop 
condition probably became something akin to a fatal exception in computing along the lines 
of when no longer able to stay awake OR when the device runs out of power. 
Either way, the aim of the system to keep users on the platform as long as possible was thus 
achieved by the doomscrolling metainterface. 
 
 
Net Art / E-Lit, Reductive Interfaces, and The Endless Doomscroller 
The cultural effects of interfaces is an ongoing subject in net art and electronic literature. 
Artist Joana Moll’s A Poetic Deconstruction of the Interface is a series of workshops that train 
individuals to critically examine contemporary interfaces, using screen-taped paper cutout 
erasure templates as a key analytical tool (Moll). Matthias Pitscher’s work Mindful Scrolling, 
part of his Social Media Meditation project, offers nothing more than a vertical webpage of 
empty boxes that never ends, using abstraction and simplification to critique the infinite 
scroll (Pitscher). Winnie Soon’s Unerasable Images occludes the majority of image search 
results for the term “六四” (“64”)—“a reference to the date of the student-led Tiananmen 
Square Protest in Beijing in 1989”—in order to reveal how “Tank Man” images persist online 
despite the Chinese government’s aim to scrub such images from the internet (Soon). In his 
book Electronic Literature, Scott Rettberg describes the sub-genre of “network writing” as a 
way to “rethink the ways we engage w/ the network,” and as a “critical mirror to help us 
better understand the networked society” (Rettberg, 182). One example in this area would 
be The Deletionist by Amaranth Borsuk, Jesper Juul, and Nick Montfort, a browser-
extension-based poetry generator that hides words on a page of the user’s choosing to 
create new poetry out of the old prose (Borsuk). Each of the example works and genres 
above (and many not described here) takes on the interface as a site of aesthetic 

 

 

4 

manipulation using techniques such as erasure in order to examine and/or critique software 
and its effects. 
 
The author’s artwork The Endless Doomscroller (viewable at endlessdoomscroller.com) is a 
net art / e-lit work that examines the cultural effects of doomscrolling, an alternative 
interface that acts as a lens on our pandemic era software-enabled collective descent into 
despair (Grosser). The work presents itself on screen as a simple social media and/or news 
publication feed, with a masthead at the top and a list of feed items below (each one as text 
contained within outlined boxes in a single vertical column) (see Figure 1).  
 

 
Figure 1: The Endless Doomscroller, interface screenshot 

 
The text of each item is a short headline, such as: 
 

All Events Cancelled 
Devastation Worsens 
Lockdowns Imminent 
Outbreak Continues 
The Numbers Look Bad 
Cases at Record Levels 
No End in Sight 

 
Each item has a hover effect when the mouse enters its area (suggesting it might be a 
button), but none of the items are clickable. The only action afforded is scrolling. And no 

 

5 

matter how long one scrolls—or how fast they scroll—The Endless Doomscroller will never 
stop presenting its bad news headlines. They just keep coming. The user not only won’t ever 
reach the end, but also will never see a “loading” indicator typical on sites like Twitter when 
one scrolls to the bottom fast enough. 
 
The Endless Doomscroller’s primary technique could be argued as one of reduction. The work 
distills news and social media sites down to their barest most generalized messages and 
interface conventions. Its headlines are derived from real news headlines found on various 
social media sites during the first months of the pandemic (with ongoing updates ever 
since), manually composed simplifications of those negative messages into their most basic 
form. The social media feeds discussed above are reduced down to their core interaction: 
the infinite scroll. Through these tactics, The Endless Doomscroller deconstructs the 
doomscrolling metainterface, revealing how it is changing what and how we read in the 
digital and pandemic age.  
 
Visitors to the work, both users and journalists, have written about experience of The 
Endless Doomscroller on mainstream social media and in publications such as ABC News, 
Gizmodo, Stuttgarter Zeitung, and Mic. Their responses reveal some of the effects of a 
reductive net art interface. For example, some users of the work were compelled to respond 
sarcastically, using a tweet or Facebook post as an opportunity to reflect on their typical 
social media platform of choice. A few examples (source is from Twitter unless otherwise 
indicated):  
 

“Are we chasing/being-fed what's the worst thing that happened on the Earth today? 
How news and social media feels like in these times.. The Endless Doomscroller” —
@voidmonk 
 

 

6 

“the only source of news I trust” —@PonchoRebound 
 
“perfectly healthy and normal” —@waxy 
 
“Uplifting” —@iamDeveloper 
 
“most trusted source of news” —@numberless 
 
“The only news site you need any more” —@DavidKrider1 

 
For others, the work enabled their own sort of reductive social media analysis: 

 
“fear fear fear fear” —@save2memefolder 
 
“ha ha ha sob” —@catacalypto 
 
“basically twitter” —@oler 

 
Some used their quote tweets to post more pointed critiques: 
 

“Twitter = “ —@toutlereste 
 
“This feels just like scrolling through twitter but without the pull to engage” —
@YoavGivati 
 
“For America, the road to doom is a rewarding one, abolishing the New Age 
positivism PR machine that refuses to address inequality, racism and the destruction 
of the public domain, infrastructure and education.” —@glovink 

 
And for many, the work elicited some form of “oh, this is what I’ve been doing with my 
time”: 
 

“I FEEL SEEN” —@cstross 
 
“Omg, I feel so called out. I need one of those shock collar things that knows when 
I'm doomscrolling.” —Annie Norman on Facebook 
 
“Who recorded my actual train of thought and made it into a website?” —Aaron 
Elkins on Facebook 
 
“This is what my browsing and internet has looked like today and I need to cut it 
out.” — @ryanruppe 

 
Gizmodo echoed these sentiments, writing: “This morning, way too early if you ask me, the 
Gizmodo Slack channel was dosed with acid reality, momentarily shattering a cozy illusion of 
purpose and the structure of days spent on the internet. I stared down my life, past, present, 
and future—thanks to The Endless Doomscroller” (Kimball).  
 
Jay Castello at Mic wrote about the work as “soothing my doomsday anxieties.” In particular, 
they pointed to the work’s technique of abstraction as soothing mechanism, writing:  
 

“…The Endless Doomscroller strips away content that could lead to a spiral of reading 
increasingly worse things. On Twitter, for example, a tweet sharing bad news can be 
a portal to a wall of replies full of bigotry or coronavirus denialism. Grosser’s project 
at least takes away that additional stressor. Similarly, the [work’s] heavily abstracted 
headlines … are a reminder that any real headline is also an abstraction of its article’s 
contents. … By serving as a reminder that doomscrolling doesn’t provide a full picture 
of the world, the Endless Doomscroller seems to erase some of the damage of its 
real(er) counterpart. Later, when seeing bad news online, it’s easier to challenge the 
snap assumptions caused by the headlines” (Castello). 

 
By stripping away the specifics wrapped up in each headline and minimizing the mechanics 
behind most interface patterns, The Endless Doomscroller appears to be creating an 
opportunity for mindfulness about how one spends time online and about who most 
benefits from these extended scroll sessions. For some, the work animates critical discussion 
about the motivations and mechanisms behind our scroll-induced anxiety: interfaces—and 
corporations—that always want more. More doom (bad news headlines) compels more 

 

7 

engagement (via continued liking/sharing/posting) which produces more personal data, thus 
making possible ever more profit. For others, the piece enables a sort of exposure or 
substitution therapy, a way to escape or replace what doomscrolling interfaces want from 
and do to us.  
 
 
Conclusion 
Social media platforms read us while we read them. Yet neither the content provided for our 
reading, nor the behavioral data scanned via their reading, are for the user’s benefit. They 
both exist to produce user engagement, structuring how and what users read in this digital 
pandemic age. One way they accomplish this is by erecting their sites as a metainterface, a 
pretty facade that portends to be in the service of the user by hiding away the myriad code, 
databases, advertisers, metrics, and more that prescribe what users can do, transforming 
users into machines that iterate on lists of doom in never-ending loops. 
 
Through its abstraction of social media interfaces, net art and electronic literature can 
illuminate the structures that underlie the cultural effects of software. In particular, 
reduction as a strategy can counter the minimalist hiding employed by the metainterface, 
replacing it with a sort of minimalist revealing. A reduction that shows rather than hides. 
 
Ultimately, what The Endless Doomscroller does is to show us how the software structures of 
social media change not only what we read but how we read. As an aesthetic reductive 
interface experience, it provides renewed opportunities for agency within the systems we all 
find ourselves stuck inside. In other words, when it comes to reading social media in the age 
of pandemic, perhaps the only way out of too much doomscrolling is endless doomscrolling. 
 
 
Works Cited 
 
Andersen, Christian Ulrik and Søren Bro Pold. The Metainterface: The Art of Platforms, Cities, 
 
 
Borsuk, Amaranth, Jesper Juul, and Nick Montfort. The Deletionist. 
 
 
Castello, Jay. “’The Endless Doomscroller’ is soothing my doomsday anxieties.” Mic, 1 Oct 
 
 
Chun, Wendy. Updating to Remain the Same: Habitual New Media. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
 
 
Conger, Kate. “Twitter revenue rises 28 percent in the fourth quarter as ad spending 
 
 
Feldman, Nina. “In Pandemic, Green Doesn't Mean 'Go.' How Did Public Health Guidance 
 
 

and Clouds. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2018. 

rebounds.” New York Times, 9 Feb 2021. 

Get So Muddled?” NPR, 4 Aug 2020. 

 

http://thedeletionist.com/. 2018. 

2020. 

2016. 

 

8 

Cambridge: MIT Press. 2008. 

interstitial time.” First Monday, 21(10). 2016.   

theusercondition.computer. v. 1.0, updated 12 Feb 2021. 

networked economy. New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Publishers. 2012. 

Fuller, Matthew. Software Studies \ a lexicon. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2008. 
 
Grosser, Ben. The Endless Doomscroller, endlessdoomscroller.com. 2020. 
 
Hassan, Robert. The age of distraction: Reading, writing, and politics in a high-speed 
 
 
Hou Je Bek, Wilfried. “Loop.” In Software Studies \ a lexicon, edited by Matthew Fuller. 
 
 
Kimball, Whitney. “Presenting The Endless Doomscroller.” Gizmodo, 4 Aug 2020. 
 
Knueven, Liz and Avery Hartmans. “Mark Zuckerberg's net worth has grown over $40 billion 
in the last year alone. Here's how the 36-year-old Facebook CEO makes and spends 
 
 
his $114 billion fortune.” Business Insider, 19 Apr 2021. 
 
Levy, Steven. facebook: The Inside Story. New York: Blue Rider Press. 2020. 
 
Lorusso, Silvio. The User Condition: Computer Agency and Behavior. 
 
 
Lovink, Geert. Sad By Design. London: Pluto Press, 2019. 
 
Moll, Joana. A Poetic Deconstruction of the Interface. http://www.janavirgin.com/HANGAR/. 
 
 
Monteiro, Stephen. The Fabric of Interface: Mobile Media, Design, and Gender. Cambridge: 
 
 
Mowlabocus, Sharif. “The ’mastery’ of the swipe: Smartphones, transitional objects and 
 
 
Pitscher, Matthias. Mindful Scrolling, mindfulscrolling.net, 2017. Accessed 10 May, 2021. 
 
Pold, Søren Bro. “New ways of hiding: towards metainterface realism.” In “After the post-
 
 
Pooley, Eric. “Grins, Gore and Videotape.” New York Magazine, 1989. 
 
Rettberg, Scott. Electronic Literature. Cambridge: Polity Press. 2019. 
 
Roose, Kevin. “The Week in Tech: How to Stop Coronavirus ‘Doomsurfing’.” New York Times, 
 
 
Shearer, Elisa. “More than eight-in-ten Americans get news from digital devices.” Pew 
 
 

truth,” coordinated by Jorge Luis Marzo Pérez. Artnodes no. 24: 72-82. 2019. 

2016. 

MIT Press. 2017. 

20 Mar 2020. 

Research Center, 12 Jan, 2021. 

 

9 

Jan 2021. 

2020. 

Soon, Winnie. Unerasable Images. http://siusoon.net/unerasable-images/. 2018. 
 
Stuart Soroka, Patrick Fournier, Lilach Nir. “Cross-national evidence of a negativity bias in 
 
psychophysiological reactions to news.” Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 116 (38) 18888-18892. Sep 2019.  
 
 
Trefis Team. “23% Rise Since End of 2019, Will Facebook’s Stock Grow Further?” Forbes. 13 
 
 
Watercutter, Angela. “Doomscrolling Is Slowly Eroding Your Mental Health.” Wired, 25 Jun 
 
 
Zuboff, Shoshana. The Age of Surveillance Capitalism. New York: Hachette, 2019. 
 
Zumbrun, Josh. “Coronavirus Slump Is Worst Since Great Depression. Will It Be as Painful?” 
 
 
 
 

The Wall Street Journal, 10 May 2020. 

 

10 

