What Do We Call This? 
Dr. Bronwin Patrickson 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Between 2019 – 2020, The University of South Wales collaborated with a consortium of 
creative commercial practitioners dubbed Fictioneers in a UKRI funded, Audience of the 
Future Research and Development (R&D) demonstrator project designed to further develop 
digital storytelling practice within the UK Creative Industries.  Working with the popular 
Wallace and Gromit creative franchise, the consortium drew upon their combined skills in 
games production, animation, creative marketing and new technology development to create 
a location-based experience entitled Wallace & Gromit: Big Fix Up (Big Fix Up).  This 
innovative addition to the popular Wallace & Gromit franchise is designed to propel new and 
playful digital storytelling formats.   
 
Big Fix Up is delivered via a central, enhanced mobile application.  The application presents 
a pre-determined story, delivered via a rich tapestry of serialised, short multi-platform media 
elements which include YouTube videos and comics, as well as augmented reality game-play 
challenges.  Unlike traditional transmedia, where networked media might be distributed on 
separate media platforms, the entire multi-media story is presented via the central mobile 
application.   This offers a rich and variable experience, but also highlights the classification 
challenges that genre-defying, emerging technologies can pose.   
 
To discuss these challenges, as much as the creative opportunities of limited choice narratives 
in digital media, I will first review the digital storytelling mechanisms of Big Fix Up, and 
consider potential future developments within this style.   Following this, I will explore 
whether any additional genre insights can be gained by also considering the distributed, and 
collaborative Big Fix Up research and development process.   
 
ENHANCED, DIGITAL STORYTELLING ACROSS MULTIPLE MEDIA 
 
Choice driven, variable plot structures traditionally enable participants to make a range of 
variable responses to story prompts, leading to a variety of potential outcomes, or plot 
developments.   By requiring participants to choose between emotionally charged, competing 
scenarios, for example, variable, branching narratives can prompt dramatic participatory 
experiences.  The participatory capacity, or agency to make meaningful choices in an 
unfolding experience is traditionally regarded as one of the great pleasures of digital 
storytelling (Murray).   
 
By contrast, the participatory choices available in Big Fix Up revolve around a variable 
engagement with a pre-set news feed, linked to interactive game-play options.  The news feed 
is made more dynamic because of the variety of media that it presents, as well as the story 
progression it enables over time. These serialised transmedia storytelling strategies for 
mobile phone delivery offered a way for Fictioneers to explore alternatives to branching tree 
narrative structures.   
 
Part of the motivation for this alternative approach was the risk of combinatorial explosion in 
variable digital storytelling environments.  Branching tree narrative plot choice diagrams 
which track the potential choices involved and their potential outcomes can multiply 
exponentially, depending upon the number of scenarios available: 

 

“ If you were going to write a story with ten choices, two options at each choice, 
you would have to write 2^10 (which is 1024) branches. That’s a lot of writing. 
Add one more choice to the game, and you have to write double that: 2048.” 
(Nelson)  

 
Aardman Animations limited, who produced the time-consuming animation content, as well 
as the YouTube videos and digital comic media featured within the mobile application, were 
keen to avoid this approach. 
 
Established workarounds to help avoid combinatorial explosion include the provision of less 
consequential choices, and interactions in-between fixed and pre-set plot development points 
(sometimes called the foldback, or string of pearls approach).  In more complex versions, 
those choices and plot developments are further modified by variables that can be tracked 
through the course of a playful engagement like player skills, or chosen personality type, 
morality ratings, status, resources, the world state, and NPC variables.  
 
Whilst not the first digital storytelling innovation propelled by budget considerations, 
Wallace & Gromit: Big Fix Up is one of the first to adapt this approach for augmented 
mobile delivery.  Self-described as an augmented story Wallace & Gromit: Big Fix Up, 
employs a somewhat similar approach to those outlined in the previous paragraph, in that it 
offers interactive game-play options linked to a pre-determined plot. The plot is developed 
via short, media elements that are optional to view and mimic social newsfeed posts that 
update over time and mark the developing story, or event beats.    The unfolding variety of 
media elements include animations, YouTube videos, and digital comics, alongside calls to 
explore simulated environments and engage in augmented reality game-play options.  Only 
Fictioneers can vary their order and availability of these updates, which are closely 
networked via the central newsfeed.  Narrativized, augmented reality game-play options also 
become available over time, linked to the developing story, and according to the player’s 
resource inventory.   
 
Even despite the inability to change the newsfeed beyond updating it, the application is still 
complex.  Participants can pick and choose engagements with sequential media chunks that 
are posted to the central feed.   These sorts of choices have limited influence on the unfolding 
media, but the option to engage with some and not all posts support a sense of 
personalisation.  The experience of complexity is also emphasised by the use of emerging 
technologies within the experience, particularly the use of mobile augmented reality play 
options, which often required extensive user guidance.  For many participants, the 
combination of new and unfamiliar media  engagements, partnered with a chunked, 
distributed story that unfolds across a variety of in-app media was novelty enough.   
 
As audiences become more familiar with augmented mobile media, possible future 
developments include even more affective interactions.  The scrolling twine story “Even 
Cowgirls Bleed” (Love), for example, illustrates the kinaesthetic appeal of a rhythmic and 
scrolling story progression (in this case, the hypertext clicks that both reveal and transform 
the unfolding text).  Each click reveals a bit more of the unfolding story, enhanced by the odd 
surprise, such as a novel and intense affect (the intense, click triggered sound of gunfire, and 
appearance of bloodied text).  This approach supports an engaging participatory experience 
even despite the lack of meaningful agency.   
 

In a simulated social news feed environment, there is already a lot going on, but more 
dynamic news feed possibilities include intermittent audio affects, and feed update 
animations like spinning posts, such as those included in Alan Bigelow’s (2017) social media 
styled narrative How To Rob A Bank.  Game elements might also potentially enable further 
interaction, for example rewards that accumulate as more posts are read, or an optional story 
recap window that also helps to flag important updates. 
 
In follow on projects Fictioneers are exploring the ways that multi-perspective narratives, 
told through the overlapping and potentially contradictory narrations of multiple characters 
could also complement the chunked news feed plot progression.  This approach prompts 
another alternative to the pleasure of agency, which is the pleasure of evaluation.  
 
For example, participants in the interactive, video drama game Her Story (Barlow) are 
directly cast as an investigator, required to piece together (through key-word search, for 
example) a sometimes contradictory interview archive, recorded with the same suspect over 
seven different occasions in order to evaluate the truth of the events in question.  In this  
example the participatory choices affect the order of replay, as well as the context of the seen 
media accessed as a result of the participant’s search strategy (as opposed to their dramatic 
action choice). 
 
Reflection and evaluation are linked to the process of learning and transformation.  The 
enactment of multiple perspectives is a hallmark of process dramas (O'Neill and Lambert) for 
this very reason, since these broader perspectives can prompt further reflection and challenge 
narrow thinking.   
 
In some game genres, the pleasures of evaluation inform strategy choices – and may also 
involve ethical dilemmas to prompt deeper reflection.  The scrolling AlJazeera documentary 
game Pirate Fishing indicates yet another way to introduce evaluative interaction into a single 
scrolling story.   Participants are cast as trainee investigators who can help the pirate fishing 
investigation team by evaluating and classifying media elements according to the type of 
information provided (evidence, notes, or background information).  Story elements are 
intermittently presented as a range of investigation points within a virtual representation of a 
real-world environment, like drawers to be opened, but in the main, the Pirate Fishing 
investigation unfolds as a single-story progression.  In process the participant gains rewards 
such as badges, whilst the in-game investigate team rises to the challenge at hand. The value 
of this sort of approach is that it links the participatory interaction directly with the evolving 
events.  There are also numerous ways to evolve these sorts of participatory rewards, for 
example by rewarding participants with tools and insights that can be used in further game-
play challenges, and trigger engaging results when enough are collected. 
 
As these numerous examples indicate, there are captivating alternatives, and adjustments to 
branching tree plot structures, many of which involve genre hybridity.  These alternatives 
emphasise the importance of a dynamic storytelling experience, as much as a dynamic text.  
Beyond the need to make that experience engaging, Fictioneers also faced another challenge: 
How to describe this media rich, playful augmented mobile digital storytelling experience to 
potential audiences? 
 
 
 
 

THE CHALLENGE TO DEFINE HYBRID MEDIA  
 
That this analysis of the narrative design considerations for a multimodal augmented mobile 
storytelling experience is as relevant to the electronic literature conference, as it might be to a 
number of conferences in other discourse specialisms reflects the hybridity, and complexity 
of digital convergence.   
 
In many ways we are living in what could be called a fuzzy genre era.  For example, 
optimum writing styles traditionally vary across platforms.  Audio-visual media thrives on 
conversational style scripts, whilst print is ideally suited to more detailed and potentially 
subjective texts, and digital native texts privilege potentially dynamic networks and data-
enhancements.  Yet, at the same time, digital storytelling productions like Big Fix Up are 
increasingly convergent, and feature multiple media.  In the case of Big Fix Up the optimum 
text was informed by the platform: mobile screens are small and reading is also difficult 
whilst moving, so text is likely to be condensed and mimic a type of captioning, or 
navigational function, supplemented by audio-visual media written in a more conversational 
style. 
 
Convergent texts are being transformed by the media that contextualise them and this sort of 
transformation can be hard to categorize.  As the producers of Wallace & Gromit: Big Fix Up 
explained to me, the lack of categories were hard to promote at times, since there was no 
established, or definitive way to describe this sort of experience, and few frameworks to 
evaluate it. 
 

“It's very difficult to describe the project. You can't say it succinctly … I am 
learning to say it's an interactive, immersive storytelling experience realized 
through augmented reality on your phone. That's the fastest way of saying it. But 
even that doesn't sort of bring in the transmedia, etc…”  
(Edward Russell, Fictioneers producer) 
 

In the Big Fix Up app, the game-play evolves on linked, but nevertheless separate tabs within 
the app.  These tabs point to upcoming jobs, as well as an inventory of acquired gadgets. 
These gadgets are visually and textually located within the story that is unfolding in the news 
stream.  Participants are cast as employees of Wallace and Gromit’s company, 
Spic’n’Spanners, which embroils them in all sorts of mischief playing out in the feed.  They 
need to take an AR call from Wallace as part of their induction, for example, and bust their 
employers out of an evil trap when the drama intensifies. 
 
The mix of story and game-play within the Wallace & Gromit: Big Fix Up app confused 
audiences at times.  Susan and Lee Cummings of Tiny Rebel Games, two of Fictioneers’ 
founding partners and co-writers of the application found themselves constantly needing 
explain to people that the application was not a game. 
 

“(F)or some reason, everyone thinks it's a game. And we have to go through this 
process with everyone that comes on a project.” 
 

Apple, for example, wasn’t sure at first where to place the app in their online store. 
Fictioneers were keen to ensure it wasn’t in the gaming section.  The app includes game-play, 
participants are invited to place augmented contraptions in their real-world environment and 
interact with them, but these playful challenges are designed to support the primary story..   

 

“Yes, it’s slightly a game right there. (There are) interactive loops, you build 
things, you collect things, you do things to get rewarded for that. So that's a 
game.  It passes all the systems of the game, but it’s not supposed to be…this 
was (intended to be) very light and understandable” (Lee Cummings). 

 
Alternative classifications like digital story-telling or electronic literature are helpful, since 
they can delineate interactive and narrativized experiences from other more traditional media 
encounters, including video game-play.    
 
Big Fix Up included both story and game-play.  Even though Fictioneers sought to prioritise 
the story, the hybridity of the results posed as much of a challenge as an opportunity.  
Describing the experience as a game is problematic, since in the case of Big Fix Up that 
would set up expectations of a very different type of interaction than the story driven 
experience that this application sought to deliver.  The augmented game-play was generally a 
beloved aspect of the Big Fix Up experience, although a few participants who were expecting 
more classic gameplay challenges, complained that it was a boring game.  This is a risk of 
hybrid productions, which can delight, as well as challenge expectations.  With few 
alternative terms on hand to describe the Big Fix Up app, the phrase augmented story, has 
been used on the app store, but the app is also much more than a story.  Narrative frameworks 
such as characterisation, pace and tone are relevant to projects like Wallace & Gromit: Big 
Fix Up, but they may not capture all the elements that audiences encounter in real time, for 
example, like appeal, curiosity, surprise, challenge, enchantment or affect, which imply a 
type of unfolding drama. The phrase digital storytelling experience, is also an open-ended 
concept that can be hard to pin-point.  Two participants can experience the same event in an 
entirely different way, for example.   
 
In the past I have argued that we need a new term to define the sorts of hybrid engagements 
evolving somewhere between storytelling, games, playfulness, and sociality (Patrickson).  As 
yet however, as the Big Fix Up experience reflects, the continually reinvented landscape of 
mobile  augmented  digital  storytelling  experiences,  is  almost,  but  not  quite  described  by  a 
number  of  terms  including  augmented  story,  digital  storytelling  experience,  electronic 
literature, interactive fiction, or story-game.  In the next section I discuss the value and evolving 
nature of hybrid, way-marker terms that reference specific media like literature, or games.   I 
also explore whether any further genre insights can be gained through a consideration of the 
interplay of technology and creativity that shaped the Big Fix Up experience.   
 
The collaborative process of making a mobile augmented storytelling experience 
 
One of the strongest takeaways I have from my own involvement in the Big Fix Up R&D 
process as the USW Research Fellow for Impact and Evaluation was just how integral the 
emerging technology components (augmented reality and mobile delivery, for example) 
became to the end product.  Augmented reality technologies, for example, offer dynamic, 
enhanced tracking and visualisation opportunities, whilst also demanding strict file-size 
constraints, comprehensive audience testing and extensive cross-disciplinary collaboration.    
The Big Fix Up story is one aspect of a complex, distributed application.  In many ways the 
story, and application design enact bridges between technologies and their potential 
audiences.   
 

This observation supports arguments for the importance of platform studies (Bogost and 
Montfort), yet it is equally essential to keep in mind that these are ultimately experiential, 
emergent texts (Sicart).  Whilst there may be potential theoretical tensions between platform 
media studies and experiential media interaction paradigms, it may also be worth noting that 
the team developing Big Fix Up embraced both concepts.  User experience design and user 
testing were integral to the R&D process, for example. 

Fictioneers’ combined commercial identity was the result of a merger of three separate founder 
businesses, that were each already established and situated in the same south west region of 
the United Kingdom, linking Cardiff and Bristol: 1) Tiny Rebel Games, an independent games 
production company 2) Potato, a technical development company and 3) Sugar Creative, a 
digital  design  team.    The  consortium  was  relatively  small,  employing  under  fifty  multi-
disciplinary,  creative  digital  technology  workers.    Aardman  animations,  who  licensed  the 
Wallace  &  Gromit  IP  were  also  active,  and  influential  agents  within  the  R&D  process.  
Together with Tiny Rebel Games, members of the Aardman team designed the delivery model 
and co-wrote the evolving multi-modal story.  Aardman also produced the animated shorts, 
YouTube  videos  and  digital  comics  for  the  app.    The  funder  UKRI  (UK  Research  and 
Innovation), also placed a number of fundamental conditions upon the grant award, such as the 
requirement that Fictioneer’s work with a known IP, and that the initial release be available to 
the public without charge.   

In other words, right from the start this was a distributed creative R&D process that required 
the  co-ordination  of  a  wide  range  of  inter-disciplinary  skill-sets,  personalities  and  work 
cultures.    People  working  on  the  project  included  storytellers,  animators,  game  designers, 
graphic  designers,  user  experience  designers,  art  asset  creators,  interactive  environment 
creators, back-end engineers, mobile application developers, producers and brand managers.  

In order to document and evaluate the research and development (R&D) process I interviewed 
the team and also joined morning stand-up meetings, progress reviews and team socials over 
many months. During the Wallace & Gromit: Big Fix Up R&D process it was readily apparent 
that  the  team  understood  that  their  desire  to  prioritise  the  story  introduced  unique 
considerations.  When decisions needed to be made about what aspects could potentially be cut 
in order to help manage budget and time restraints, for example, those decisions also had to be 
weighed against the need to tell a coherent story.  The need for coherence was a constant 
consideration and one that was regularly tested, and retested with potential users.  This co-
ordinated  approach  also  situated  participants  as  additional  collaborators  within  the  R&D 
process  by  emphasizing  regular  experimentation  through  early  prototyping  and  in-depth 
testing.  Yet, emerging technology development opportunities were equally influential. 

As Mulligan (2014) points out complex problems just as often require networked solutions, 
such as whole team collaborations, and extended periods of technology capacity research.  For 
Fictioneers, this co-ordination was enhanced by a key decision early in the R&D project to 
merge aspects of their separate businesses within this project and consciously work to evolve 
their own new, and united identity: Fictioneers.  This effort required a proactive program of 
managerial appointments, team building, supported by team coaches, identity envisioning, and 
extensive collaborative encouragements.  With all that in place, Fictioneers emerged to drive a 
unified digital storytelling vision. 
 
In terms of the challenge to explain distributed and fluid convergent, augmented, digital mobile 
storytelling  experiences,  double  barrel  terms  like  interactive  fiction,  interactive  narrative, 

digital  storytelling,  and  indeed  electronic  literature  are  important  way-markers,  linked  to 
equally defining audience cultures.   In a fluid field of possibility, these way-marker signals 
help  to  emphasise  literary,  and  storytelling  aspects  within  the  infinitely  variable,  potential 
unfolding of a text, or application, or experience.  Even more definitive, or nuanced sub-genre 
monikers may yet emerge, but perhaps over time the way-marker terms are themselves also 
being redefined to the point that they also capture the hybrid spaces beyond the text itself. 
 
In an exploration of the possible applications of scientific complexity paradigms to the field of 
narratology,  literary theorist John Pier (2017) concluded that complexity is a useful lens for 
narrative studies, since narrative is inherently complex.  Nevertheless, he rejects the suggestion 
that there should be a new field of complex narrative studies, since as he points out, the term 
complexity merely restates the problem, and doesn’t help to clarify the definition: 
 

“Complexity manifests and configures itself in different ways according to the field 
concerned,  and  for  this  reason  its  theorisation  and  analysis  must  be  adapted 
accordingly” (Pier: 560).   

 
Whilst this is true, at the same time in order to better understand the ways that hybrid digital 
storytelling experiences work it also helps to directly grapple with those complexities, such as 
the need for way-markers, the importance of sub-genres within the field, and the emergent 
nature of any engagement with an electronic text, as much as the text itself.   
 
A convergent augmented mobile storytelling experience like Wallace & Gromit: Big Fix Up, 
involves so many emergent hybridities that in the end, Fictioneers came to the conclusion that 
they would need to be their own defining example within the space.   
 

“(S)uccess will look like being able to talk about it from its name and people 
knowing exactly what it is.” Edward Russell, Fictioneers producer. 
 

Fictioneers continue to pursue this goal. 

 
 

Author. "Her Story." Publisher, 2015. Web. 
New Media as Material Constraint: An Introduction to Platform Studies. Electronic 

Techtonics: Thinking at the Interface. Proceedings of the First International HASTAC 
Conference. 2007. Print. 

Love, Christine. "Even Cowgirls Bleed."  2013. Web. 3.5.18. 
Murray, Janet Hamlet on the Holodeck: The Future of Narrative in Cyberspace. MIT press, 

Nelson, Paul. "Designing Branching Narrative." The Story Element. Paul Nelson 2015. Web. 

1997. Print. 

3.5.20. 

O'Neill, Cecily, and Alan Lambert. Drama Structures: A Practical Handbook for Teachers. 

Nelson Thornes, 1982. Print. 

Plai: Staged Encounters in Computer-Mediated Environments. Proceedings of the Sixth 

Australasian Conference on Interactive Entertainment. 2009. Print. 

Pier, John. "Complexity: A Paradigm for Narrative?" Emerging Vectors of Narratology. Ed. 

Per Krogh Hansen, John Pier, Philippe Roussin, Wolf Schmid. Per Krogh Hansen,  

Roussin, Philippe 

Schmid, Wolf eds. ed. Vol. Narratologia 57. Berlin and Boston: De Gruyter, 2017. 533 - 65. 

Sicart, Miguel. "Against Procedurality." Game studies 11.3 (2011): 209. Print. 

Print. 

 

