 

 

Open to Construction: reading and writing bodies in 

digital fiction and the open web platform 

Christine Wilks, Astrid Ensslin, Carla Rice, Sarah Riley, Megan Perram, Hannah 

Fowlie, Lauren Munro and Aly Bailey 

 
 
Drawing parallels between the open web platform and the open way a fictional body 
can be constructed from a text, this paper explores the creative and ethical 
strategies employed in the creation of a feminist interactive digital fiction for body 
image narrative therapy, advocacy and plurality by the Writing New Bodies project. 
Following a period of feminist participatory action research, the results of which 
have been published in the electronic book review (Ensslin et al. 2020), we are now 
at production stage and Christine Wilks is currently developing the digital fiction, 
co-designed for a new form of interactive, body-non-specific bibliotherapy. 
 
Background & the participant research 
 
Body image concerns affect the well-being of a generation who are coming of age 
immersed in digital culture. This is particularly true for young women and non-binary 
individuals of diverse backgrounds who regularly confront appearance-related 
pressures. Furthermore, the neoliberal dictates of postfeminism have pitted women 
in competition with one another, creating a culture of distrust and division between 
the more and less privileged sides of the postfeminist divide (Milne 2018; Rice 2014; 
Gill 2007). The latter include women of colour, women from lower socio-economic 
backgrounds, women with disabilities, queer women, non-binary, woman-
identifying individuals, and any intersectional combinations they may represent. In 
short, women’s bodies remain “a function of the social world’s inscriptions” 
(Jennifer Scappettone 2007: 182; see Elizabeth Grosz). This effect is augmented by 
our hypervisual, AI-infused, social and mobile media culture that privileges 
unrealistic ‘ideal’, tall, thin, heteronormative, white, ‘able-’bodies in young women 
and inadvertently leads to poor self-esteem, anxiety, overexercising, eating 
disorders and/or worse (Hogue and Mills 2018 etc). 
 

1 

 

Writing New Bodies is an intercontinental project, funded by the Social Sciences 
and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC IG 435-2018-1036; see 
Ensslin et al. 2020). It brings together a team of transdisciplinary researchers in 
theories of gender and the body, critical psychology, art and social justice, digital 
media arts, electronic literature, narrative, and digital culture. Our goal is to critically 
co-design and evaluate an interactive web app for body image narrative therapy 
with and for our target group of women and non-binary individuals, aged 18-25, 
from diverse intersectional backgrounds.  
 
In order to create media art and literature that fosters self-compassion and positive 
body-image in our target audience, a considerate, balanced and participant-
informed approach is needed that takes into account the complex, multi-
dimensional nature of affect in narrative media interaction. Equally importantly, it 
needs to follow the principles of inclusive design (Clarkson et al. 2003), which 
encourages equitable access - both materially (in terms of accessible technologies 
and platforms) and psychologically (pertaining to users’ ability to self-project and 
relate to media content in egalitarian ways). 
  
Methodologically, we are using a combination of Feminist Participatory Action 
Research and Critical Community Co-Design. FPAR is a participatory and action-
oriented conceptual and methodological framework that centers gendered power 
dynamics and women’s experiences both theoretically and practically, aiming to 
empower woman-identified individuals in a variety of ways. It enables a critical 
understanding of multiple, intersectional perspectives. It works toward inclusion and 
social change through participatory processes while exposing researchers’ own 
biases and assumptions. Importantly, researchers and participants learn from each 
other through iterations of critical reflection and re-design.  
 
In spring 2019 we held four workshops in three Canadian locations, with a total of 
21 participants. They engaged in a range of communicative activities, such as 
reflective dialog, and free, auto-narrative writing (sometimes using third person to 
talk about themselves at a narrative distance). Participants played digital body 
fictions made by Wilks, as well as a range of Twine1 fictions, to get a feel for the 
software and its storytelling options. They also wrote their own Twine stories as a 
form of interventionist self-disclosure and as a hypertextual exploration of options 

1 Twine is an open-source tool for telling interactive, nonlinear stories - https://twinery.org/ 

 

2 

 

they may not usually consciously consider as part of imagining their bodies and the 
decisions they make about their embodied lives (we tested this therapeutic use of 
Twine in one of our pilot studies, and it worked well for individual auto-narration - 
see Ensslin et al., 2016). What turned out to be a key element of the workshops was 
the fact that Wilks was present throughout and engaged with participants as artist, 
co-facilitator, and software instructor. Her experience of working with our 
participants turned out to be key to her ability to develop a co-designed digital 
fiction. 
 
From participant research to creative implementation 
 
The participants raised a multitude of issues and themes that could, potentially, be 
pursued in a digital fiction. Building on the information provided by participants, the 
research team made connections within and across research sites through the 
coding of the participant data, which included the transcribed audio recordings of 
discussions and the participants' writings. In an attempt to transmute the resulting 
diverse and manifold richness into a usable form for a digital fiction, Wilks mapped 
the concerns and themes identified onto various feminist theories to see if a 
configuration emerged that would lend itself to interactive storytelling. As a 
structuring guide, she found Sandra Bartky's three categories of disciplinary 
practice particularly useful: body size and shape; movement, gesture and posture; 
and the body as ornamented surface. Following Foucault, Bartky argues that these 
disciplinary practices produce “docile bodies” that are recognizably feminine 
through the process of internalizing norms (1988). Judith Butler's notion of 
performing gender identity (1997) also resonated with the participant data. In terms 
of narrative content and the therapeutic brief, she looked for guidance from 
evidence-based body image therapy methodologies (Cash, 2008; Grogan, 2016; 
O’Connor et al. 2017; Orbach, 2019; Kite and Kite, 2020). Nevertheless, the 
participants' own stories and memories offered the most fertile ground for the 
creative fiction-making process. The coded transcriptions of the workshop 
discussions provide valuable corroborating and amplifying support.  
 
One thing was clear, the participants wanted to resist the pressures of our hyper-
visual culture, which contributes to so much body dissatisfaction. Collectively, we 
decided to avoid graphic, mimetic representations of the body. Therefore, there is 
no avatar, the digital fiction is text-based but full of bodies constructed textually by 

3 

 

the reader-player from the dynamic onscreen lexia. 
 
Narratives that require characters and short form narratives often work best with 
only one protagonist. We had hoped that an idea of the main characters would 
surface during the participant workshops but they offered such a vibrant mix of 
voices, memories and stories that Wilks, regarding character as a representation of 
viewpoint, came away pondering how to distill all these different points of view into 
a single protagonist. Her first impulse was to propose a world of (four) stories, each 
with a different body image theme. However, when she began working on what was 
to be the first story, on the theme of body size and shape, more characters 
emerged who began to interject with their own stories or viewpoints. Rather than 
stick to her initial plan, Wilks allowed these stories to fold into and expand the main 
story. Later, it struck her that this change was apposite because, in many ways, it 
mirrored the social experience of the participant workshops. 
 
Characters & the interactive narrative 
 
The protagonist of the digital fiction, Jordan, has body image issues relating to her 
size and shape, which become evident from her negative self-talk. The interactive 
narrative traces Jordan's daily life - working, eating, commuting, interacting with 
social media, socializing with friends, spending solitary time at home - a cycle that 
repeats with variations. Throughout, Jordan struggles with competing internal and 
external voices, influencing how she behaves, thinks and feels. During a key scene 
at a house party with a group of friends, a mirror shatters and Jordan (erroneously) 
feels responsible. The incident stimulates a collective sharing of body-image-related 
observations, memories and feelings as the friends pick up the pieces. These story 
fragments, speculations and arguments, that pierce, bespeckle, extend and 
complicate the main narrative (not least because of the effect they have on Jordan), 
were inspired by the personal stories and experiences shared during the participant 
workshops. However, being fiction, Wilks inserted some other, more polarised, 
voices and POVs for dramatic (and therapeutic) purposes. This assemblage 
dramatizes the affective network of kinship of the participant workshops and, 
because the narrative is interactive and choice-based, the network incorporates the 
reader-player in a concrete way.  
 
 

4 

 

Dramatize is the operative word because, although text-based, there is no (global) 
narrator, no single highest level speech position from which the whole narrative 
discourse originates. All of the characters speak for themselves, like actors in a 
play. In the case of the protagonist, her interior dialogue of conflicting hyper-critical 
and more supportive voices (e.g. her Inner Critic and Inner Ally) is also dramatized. 
Thus Jordan becomes “a posthuman collectivity, an ‘I’ transformed into the ‘we’ of 
autonomous agents operating together to make a self” (Hayles, 1999, p. 6) and, 
crucially, one of these agents is the reader-player. As an interactive protagonist, 
Jordan is the character or point of view that the reader plays by making meaningful 
choices on her behalf that, in a diegetic feedback loop, can affect her body image, 
raising or lowering her levels of body dissatisfaction. This, in turn, affects narrative 
progress. At these decision moments, the digital fictional character and the 
engaged reader-player become one. For the purposes of this paper, we will call this 
blended or entangled posthuman entity, the reader-playing-as-Jordan. Situating the 
reader-player in the mind of the protagonist, may lead to enhanced empathic 
identification and agency and, therefore, a more profoundly immersive (and 
potentially transformative) experience. This process of “diegetic enactment” (Wilks 
2020) is where we postulate the therapeutic value lies via an extradiegetic feedback 
loop which may induce the reader-player to reflect upon, and perhaps subtly alter, 
their own body image.  
 
For instance, discussing non-interactive print fiction, Zunshine (2006) argues: 
 

The cognitive rewards of reading fiction might thus be aligned with the 
cognitive rewards of pretend play through a shared capacity to stimulate and 
develop the imagination. It may mean that our enjoyment of fiction is 
predicated--at least in part--upon our awareness of our "trying on" mental 
states potentially available to us but at a given moment differing from our 
own. (loc. 327) 

 
If this is the case, it follows that the cognitive rewards may be even more powerful 
in an interactive fiction that engages the reader-player in diegetic enactment, a 
more active form of pretend play. The reader-playing-as-Jordan is not only 'trying 
on' mental states but also 'trying on' various decision-making processes and 
exploring their consequences for (further) mental states involving body image. In the 
absence of a narrator, there is no higher authority to depend on or defer to, the 
reader-player must rely on their own interpretive powers and use their own 

5 

 

judgement. Furthermore, some of the decision-making is also about taking action in 
the world, such as engaging in feminist social activism, so the effect of 'trying on' 
could be beneficial or enlightening (for want of a better word) in multiple ways. As a 
branching narrative with a cyclic structure there is no win-lose end state in our 
digital fiction, there are simply different consequences for different inclinations. If 
they choose to cycle through other/more days in the life of the protagonist, the 
reader-playing-as-Jordan may 'try on' the effects of different choices. 
 
Narrative therapeutic benefits 
 
The literature on body image problems and body dysmorphic disorders indicate that 
cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) approaches are amongst the most successful 
therapies (Grogan, 2016; O’Connor et al. 2017). These involve some form of 
questioning and challenging habitual thoughts or thinking patterns. In a text-based 
interactive narrative with a therapeutic remit, where the reader-player has direct 
access to the mind of the protagonist and some power to literally change her mind, 
a CBT-inspired storytelling approach would seem to be a good fit. Afterall, as 
Palmer argues, "narrative fiction is, in essence, the presentation of fictional mental 
functioning" (2004, loc. 98). So, Wilks has taken CBT into account in both the form 
and content of the narrative interaction. For example, Jordan experiments with 
Mirror Exposure Therapy (a form of CBT). This was directly inspired by the many 
references to mirrors in the participant data and one particular participant, who 
wrote positively about their mirror exposure experience. However, because CBT 
focuses on thought, it can reinforce the mind-body split, which we want to avoid. 
Nor do we want to reduce the widespread problem of body dissatisfaction and the 
responsibility for 'fixing' it to the individualised level. Hopefully, the intersectional 
cast of characters, who from time to time engage in discussion around the broader 
societal issues and offer casual or more politicized critiques of the effects of neo-
liberal consumerism, will contextualise and expand the individual mind-centred 
drama.  
 
The narrative's cast of characters express a range of different experiences, 
perceptions, thoughts and feelings about their bodies and the world they live in. To 
a lesser or greater degree, all struggle or have struggled with body dissatisfaction. 
Some characters' preoccupations, beliefs and attitudes tend to have detrimental 
effects on body image, whilst others have healing or protective effects. For 

6 

 

example, some characters are ardent feminists and "[r]esearch has shown that 
women who hold feminist attitudes to body image are more satisfied than those 
who do not identify with feminist values" (Grogan, 2017, p. 189). The interplay of 
Jordan's inner voices, her interactions with other characters and, on occasions, with 
intrusive fictional marketing messages challenge the reader-playing-as-Jordan in 
positive and negative ways. How normative or how empowering and liberating their 
effect depends on the choices the reader-playing-as-Jordan makes. The nature of 
the choices offered throughout the narrative include, not only decisions about what 
to do but also, different ways they may choose to think or feel about the matter at 
hand. In other words, many of the interactive choices woven through the narrative 
dramatize situations and enact processes influenced by CBT methods. Meanwhile, 
behind the scenes, the underlying ludonarrative program tracks the tendencies of 
the reader-playing-as-Jordan towards more normative or more liberating and 
empowering choices, and this affects the course they take through the branching 
narrative. 
 

Ludonarrative design and the docile body 
 
The digital fiction is text-based but its visual language is equally important. Jordan, 
the protagonist, is represented by an abstract curvilinear freeform shape, which 
Wilks calls an 'organic' (when writing digitally, it is crucial to name entities so that 
they can be addressed in/by code). Animation brings the organic to life, suggesting 
some kind of embodied subjectivity, behaviour, bodily characteristics and/or 
emotional responses. Abstraction leaves the organic open to interpretation and its 
signification fluid. 
 
Foucault's concept of the state's disciplinary power, which, through constant 
surveillance and normalizing judgement, produces 'docile bodies', has directly 
influenced Wilks' ludonarrative design. Specifically, an algorithm based on a 
dynamic 'docility value' affects the morphing appearance and behaviour of the 
organic. The higher the docility value, the more the organic conforms to a standard 
symmetrical shape and its motion restricted by a restraining visible geometry. The 
lower the docility value, the more freeform is the shape, the more liberated its 
movement and the weaker the restricting geometry. The docility value is affected by 
programmed narrative events and, crucially, the choices the reader-player makes, 
who, in a feedback loop, is affected by visible changes in the organic. Furthermore, 

7 

 

the reader-player's choices contribute to an aggregate 'Docile-Body-Bearing' value 
which helps steer a course through the cyclic structure of the non-linear narrative. 
 
This docility-based algorithm is a neat way of designing a ludonarrative/playable 
narrative, it seems fitting, but, at the same time, we are uneasy about the rule of a 
bipolar numerical value. This inherent contradiction is an interesting analogy for the 
very issues our project aims to address. As our participants intimated, we want to 
resist normalization but recognise that we cannot completely escape it. We must 
find ways of being in the world as it is, whilst also finding ways of making changes 
in the world. However, we envisage that the power of narrative will have a far 
stronger effect than an underlying algorithm, which, afterall, only assists in steering 
the narrative, it doesn't determine the narrative content. The richness, complexity, 
ambiguity and nuance of storytelling born out of the lived experiences of our 
research participants will override a reductive binary system, rendering the digital 
binary an ancillary rather than dominant element in our interactive narrative for 
bibliotherapy. 
 
The principle of minimal departure 
 
If, as Possible Worlds narrative theory posits, the real world serves as a model for 
the mental construction of textual fictional storyworlds, it follows that our 
experience and knowledge of real bodies, including our own bodies, serve as a 
model for the mental construction of textual fictional bodies. Unless a text draws 
attention to the physical appearance of a fictional character, the reader will tend to 
assume, according to Ryan's “principle of minimal departure” (1991), that their body 
conforms to a familiar or generic norm (two eyes, two arms, two legs, etc.). 
Potentially, due to the empathic identification induced through diegetic enactment, 
the reader-player's own body model may fluidly interleave, superimpose or merge 
with their mental construction of the protagonist’s body as they become the reader-
playing-as-Jordan. Since there is no narratorial voice to authoritatively describe 
Jordan's body and it is never depicted in mimetic visual form, how the reader-player 
constructs Jordan's body is open to interpretation, open to (re)construction. 
Jordan's negative self-talk describes her as fat, flabby and repulsive, but is that true 
in the textual actual world or is it a distortion of her body image2? The reader-player 

2 This is not to suggest that body dissatisfaction can be reduced to a simplistic binary of external 
reality vs. internal distortion of reality. 

 

8 

 

may decide that Jordan's Inner Critic is not a reliable source of the textual actual 
truth about her body and mentally construct her differently, perhaps, if they identify 
strongly with her body image issues, empathically shaping her in their own self-
image. But what happens if they do not identify strongly with Jordan's particular 
body image issues? Since there is no mimetic visual nor authoritative objective 
description to fix the reader-player's mental image, the reader-playing-as-Jordan 
may construct a shape-shifting body, drawn from a pooling or mingling of their 
knowledge and experience of other bodies, which may include (if not default to) 
normative concepts of the hegemonic standard body (white, middle-class, able-
bodied).  
 
However, during the course of the narrative, the reader-player may decide that what 
Jordan's body looks like is less important than how she thinks and feels and 
behaves in her body. Or that she is “more than a body” (Kite and Kite, 2021). This is 
the narrative's aim and its openness is a deliberate strategy to make the 
bibliotherapeutic benefits and socio-political commitments of the work as fluid and 
widely accessible as possible. We will not know if the strategy is successful until we 
get feedback from reader-players but, when creating an interactive narrative for 
bibliotherapy, it is necessary to hypothesize how the reader-playing-as-Jordan may 
become embodied in the liminality between storyworld and 'real' world because 
such considerations affect the narrative and ludonarrative design. 
 
Openness & accessibility 
 
In a work that prioritises inclusive design and equitable access on both the 
psychological and material level, another primary concern is the accessibility of the 
technological medium and platform of delivery/distribution. According to the World 
Wide Web Foundation, the web is "a global public good and a basic right" (2021, 
para. 2). It is built on open standards developed and maintained by the World Wide 
Web Consortium (W3C), whose mission is to make the benefits of the web 
"available to all people, whatever their hardware, software, network infrastructure, 
native language, culture, geographical location, or physical or mental ability" (2021, 
para. 4). These aims are compatible with those of our project (although our remit is 
narrower, the digital fiction springs from a specific cultural background and we 
don't have the resources to offer it in multiple languages). Therefore, with 
accessibility in mind, and because our participants told us they preferred using 

9 

 

smartphones and tablets, we chose to build the digital fiction on and for the open 
web platform using a mobile-first, responsive web design approach for the greatest 
reach. The aim is to provide a good user experience at all screen sizes and 
combinations of hardware and network capabilities, starting with small screens and 
adding enhancements that further enrich the user experience as the screen size 
and/or technological capabilities increase. Equally important, the digital fiction web 
app complies with ARIA3 standards to make it more accessible to people with a 
diverse range of abilities and disabilities. 
 
Open access is an important, guiding principle for our project but it also resonates 
with our aims and the content and nature of the creative work on a deeper level. In 
recent years, there has been increasing anxiety about the openness of the web 
being "under attack" (Mozilla, 2019, para. 1; also see Treviranus, 2018; Surman, 
2018). For example, Behrenshausen worries about a "future without an open Web... 
in which people are... beholden to those with the power to determine what everyone 
reads, studies, watches, and says... It’s a future in which people can’t engage in 
basic interactions without first releasing details about their identities to multiple 
stakeholders capable of tracking their activities and tailoring their potential views of 
the world" (2018, para. 16). Compare this with Bartky's discussion of Foucault's 
notion of bodies subjected to disciplinary practices: "This production of 'docile 
bodies' requires that an uninterrupted coercion be directed to the very processes of 
bodily activity, not just their result; this 'microphysics of power' fragments and 
partitions the body's time, its space, and its movements." (Bartky, 1988, p.130). The 
latter could be equally apt as a description of the subtly coercive effects of social 
media platforms, which Behrenshausen describes as "'walled gardens': beautifully 
manicured and maintained (but nevertheless cordoned and closed) environments" 
(2018, para. 12), which, in turn, brings to mind the grooming regimens and 
behaviour precepts that aim to produce 'docile' feminine bodies. It is no surprise, 
then, that the big tech platforms that want to lock us in to proprietary systems are 
amongst the most prolific purveyors of imagery and messaging that contribute to 
body dissatisfaction in young people (Aparicio-Martinez et al. 2019; de Vries et al. 
2019). Whilst it is important to challenge and resist oppressive messaging from 
within the social media platforms, it is also important to resist their dominance and 
control by offering content on and encouraging use of the open web.   
 

3 Accessible Rich Internet Applications (see MDN Contributors, 2021). 

 

10 

 

Concluding thoughts 
 
Both the refusal to visually represent a (female-gendered or sexed-coded) body in a 
digital fiction and the refusal to use proprietary closed platforms, therefore, 
represent a form of resistance to the normative forces of cultural hegemony within 
neoliberalism. In this context, choosing the open web platform is a feminist strategy 
that pragmatically and aesthetically underpins the concerns of our digital fiction, 
where the body is relatively open to (re)construction rather than defined and limited 
by the restrictive norms and unattainable ideals commonly found in digital media 
representations of bodies. 
 
 
References 
 
Aparicio-Martinez, P. et al. (2019) ‘Social Media, Thin-Ideal, Body Dissatisfaction 
and Disordered Eating Attitudes: An Exploratory Analysis’, International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 16(21). doi: 10.3390/ijerph16214177. 

Bartky, S. L. (1988) ‘Foucault, Femininity, and the Modernization of Patriarchal 
Power’, in Conboy, K., Medina, N., and Stanbury, S. (eds) Writing on the Body: 
Female Embodiment and Feminist Theory, pp. 90–110. 

Behrenshausen, B. (2018) ‘What is the open web?’, Year of Open, November. 
Available at: https://www.yearofopen.org/november-open-perspective-what-is-
open-web/what-is-the-open-web-bryan-behrenshausen-writer-and-editor-red-hat/ 
(Accessed: 6 January 2021). 

Butler, J. (1997) ‘Performative Acts and Gender Constitution’, in Conboy, K., 
Medina, N., and Stanbury, S. (eds) Writing on the Body: Female Embodiment and 
Feminist Theory. New York: Columbia University Press. 

Cash, T. (2008) The Body Image Workbook: An Eight-Step Program for Learning to 
Like Your Looks. 2Rev Ed Edition. U.S.: New Harbinger Publications. 

Clarkson, J. (2003) Inclusive design: design for the whole population. London; New 
York: Springer. 

Ensslin, A. et al. (2020) ‘“These Waves …:” Writing New Bodies for Applied E-

11 

 

literature Studies | electronic book review’, electronic book review, 5 April. Available 
at: https://electronicbookreview.com/essay/these-waves-writing-new-bodies-for-
applied-e-literature-studies/ (Accessed: 13 May 2020). 

Ensslin, A. et al. (2016) ‘Exploring digital fiction as a tool for teenage body image 
bibliotherapy’, Digital Creativity, 27(3), pp. 177–195. doi: 
10.1080/14626268.2016.1210646. 

Gill, R. (2007) ‘Postfeminist media culture: Elements of a sensibility’, European 
Journal of Cultural Studies, 10, p. 20. 

Grogan, S. (2016) Body Image: Understanding Body Dissatisfaction in Men, Women 
and Children. 3 edition. Routledge. 

Hayles, N. K. (1999) How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, 
Literature, and Informatics. 74th edition. Chicago, Ill: University of Chicago Press. 

Hogue, J. V. and Mills, J. S. (2019) ‘The effects of active social media engagement 
with peers on body image in young women’, Body Image, 28, pp. 1–5. doi: 
10.1016/j.bodyim.2018.11.002. 

Kite, Lexie and Kite, Lindsay (2020) More Than a Body: Your Body Is an Instrument, 
Not an Ornament. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. 

MDN Contributors (2021) ARIA - Accessibility | MDN, MDN Web Docs. Available at: 
https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA (Accessed: 29 
April 2021). 

Mozilla (2019) Understand the issue, The Internet Health Report 2019. Available at: 
https://internethealthreport.org/2019/understand-the-issue-openness/ (Accessed: 7 
January 2021). 

O’Connor, A., Callaghan, L. and Catchpole, C. (2017) Body Image Problems and 
Body Dysmorphic Disorder: The Definitive Treatment and Recvoery Approach: The 
Definitive Treatment and Recovery Approach. 2nd ed. Edition. Pulling the Trigger. 

Orbach, S. (2019) Bodies. Profile Books. 

Palmer, A. (2004) Fictional Minds. University of Nebraska Press. 

Rice, C. (2014) Becoming Women: The Embodied Self in Image Culture. University 

12 

 

of Toronto Press. 

Ryan, M.-L. (1991) Possible Worlds, Artificial Intelligence and Narrative Theory. 1st 
Edition. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 

Scappettone, J. (2007) ‘Response to Jennifer Ashton Bachelorettes, Even: Strategic 
Embodiment in Contemporary Experimentalism by Women’, Modern Philology, 
105(1), pp. 178–184. doi: 10.1086/587206. 

Surman, M. (2018) ‘What is the open web and why is it important?’, Year of Open, 
November. Available at: https://www.yearofopen.org/november-open-perspective-
what-is-open-web/what-is-the-open-web-and-why-is-it-important-submitted-by-
mark-surman-executive-director-of-the-mozilla-foundation/ (Accessed: 6 January 
2021). 

Treviranus, J. (2018) The Open Web: A view from the edge. (November Open 
Perspective: What is Open Web?). Available at: 
https://www.yearofopen.org/november-open-perspective-what-is-open-web/ 
(Accessed: 7 January 2021). 

de Vries, D. A., Vossen, H. G. M. and van der Kolk – van der Boom, P. (2019) ‘Social 
Media and Body Dissatisfaction: Investigating the Attenuating Role of Positive 
Parent–Adolescent Relationships’, Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 48(3), pp. 
527–536. doi: 10.1007/s10964-018-0956-9. 

Wilks, C. (2020) Stitched Up in The Conversengine: Using Expressive Processing 
and Multimodal Languages to Create a Character-Driven Interactive Digital Narrative. 
PhD. Bath Spa University. 

World Wide Web Consortium (2021) W3C Mission, W3C. Available at: 
https://www.w3.org/Consortium/mission (Accessed: 14 April 2021). 

World Wide Web Foundation (2021) Sir Tim Berners-Lee, World Wide Web 
Foundation. Available at: https://webfoundation.org/about/sir-tim-berners-lee/ 
(Accessed: 29 April 2021). 

Zunshine, L. Z. L. (2006) Why We Read Fiction: Theory of the Mind and the Novel. 
Columbus: Ohio State University Press. 
 

13 

