Gastropoetics 
By Davin Heckman 
May 7, 2021 [updated May 25,2021] 
 
Abstract: This paper will explore Memmott and Rettberg's Gastropoetics as a humanistic 
challenge to the grammar of language, platform, and text generation. The impulse is to 
situate such works within the tradition of dada and futurist performance, where obvious 
antecedents can be found. However, in the age of platform dominance, the meaning of 
experiments in absurdity and embodiment take on new meaning, as platform spaces do the 
work of aestheticizing the absurd conditions produced by the Taylorization of social life. 
Where industrial processes once disturbed the lifeworld of human craft and technique in 
the process of industrialization, the cultural world at the most minute level is subject to the 
proletarianizing process, and its reassembly into an economic model is now the work of the 
platform spaces. In other words, Platforms do the ideological work of normalizing social 
collapse as progress towards the rationalized reorganization of body politic into "taste 
communities" and other post-digital demographies. While Gastropoetics is a marginal 
practice, these culinary experiments explore the relational dynamics of cooking, hospitality, 
and eating as persistent humanistic practices, even as such practices are increasingly 
mediated by emergent practices like "food selfies" and other performative taste practices. 
Key to understanding the appeal of gastropoetics is the ad hoc nature of human production 
and consumption (see de Certeau's "everyday life") performed under the constraints of the 
generated menu, of the platform, and of the mnemotechnical system itself. 
 
---- 
Intro: This paper will be my least-paper-like presentation to an ELO conference. In the past, 
I felt the responsibility to treat my conference presentations like papers, packing them with 
critical references and laboring to establish the illusion credibility against the reality of my 
own idiocy (Latin, idiota, “ordinary person”; Greek, idios, “personal, one’s own”). But 2021 
finds me totally defeated as a scholar. Instead of thinking I should labor in vain against the 
hegemony of media industries, social networks, and the inertia of clique-bait (not a typo), I 
have decided, at least for today, to give up on scholarly writing. Instead, I write a love letter 
stuffed into a bottle and tossed into the sea. (Apologies for the accidental Police reference.) 
 
In an effort to dispense with the formalities that I have grown accustomed to, I will offer 
some ideas to frame what follows by pulling out key concepts from the abstract that I am 
obligated to fulfill: 
 
1. Futurist and Dadaist antecedents: F.T. Marinetti’s La Cucina Futurista (1932), Barbara 
Turner’s Artists’ and Writers’ Cookbook (1961) which feature’s Man Ray’s “Menu for a 
Dadaist Day,” Salvador Dali’s Les Diners de Gala (1973) are notable antecedents that 
foreground avant-garde recipes (rather than merely recipes by artists). Fluxus artist, Rikrit 
Tiravanija has developed an entire body of work based around cooking and eating together. 
Literary references to food are intrinsically weird, in that food itself is a richly affective 
cultural metaphor. Like music and other sensuous forms, it is non-representational, whereas 
the Modern literary arts are largely semiotic. Food is corporeal, often “sculptural,” and can 
be formed into symbolic objects, though the physical form must be destroyed to be 
consumed and the primary sensual experience is non-figural. On the other hand, foods can 

remind us of other tastes, smells, and feelings (and their associated contexts). It is the 
liminality of food—transformed from living matter to a meal, ingested in the passage from 
plate to body, its symbolic character shifting from form to experience, etc.—that make it an 
ideal subject for avant-garde consideration (I’d argue that these same qualities make food a 
rather consistent ritual object in human history, as well). While there is a temptation in 
scholarly writing to create some lineage of influence, I wish to argue that food has a primal 
resonance that precedes the pull of culture. Yes, we can cultivate culinary practice and 
taste, but in the end, what’s good is good, and this goodness is singular, changing from 
person to person, from year to year, from one moment to the next. What one needs or 
what one has just tasted can determine what one wants next. On the other hand, food 
might ask us to consider whether or not conceptual work is avant-garde at all—it could be 
less about what happens next and more about what is not happening now. At least this is 
the case with Fluxus, moreso than Futurism and Dada. Eating reminds us (as Latour likes to 
say) that “we have never been modern” (nor have we transcended it). 
 
2. Taylorization of social life: Frederick Winslow Taylor introduces “scientific management” 
to the process of human labor. Rather than working at holistically at craft production, Taylor 
argues, labor should be streamlined to remove all unnecessary movements. An engineer 
must examine all aspects of the production process, reducing productivity to a series of 
iterable processes that can be broken apart, rationalized, and then reorganized to remove 
all unnecessary motions. This innovation, in addition to transforming the way human bodies 
labor, makes automation simpler, allowing greater coordination of the machine and human 
in the industrial assemblage.  At first blush, the idea of social life might seem antithetical to 
such a process, as the social carries connotations of informality and excess. But, as with all 
things, it is possible to frame the sociopolitical as an assemblage of psychological and 
biological needs (see: biopolitics), which can be streamlined and optimized through 
therapeutic interventions. In this way, various sensual experiences are essentialized as 
entertainment experiences that can be recorded, formalized and transmitted via 
commercial media products (movies, games, theme parks, meals, etc.). Even fairly singular 
experiences like grief, love, despair, seduction, joy, relaxation seek to be captured and 
transformed into various kinds of labor (sex work, emotional labor, counseling, self-care, 
etc.). Under the microscope of social media, even formerly idiosyncratic events like 
interpersonal conversation, arguments, condolences, flirtations, illness, triumphs are placed 
under the panoptic gaze of data-mining industries—our every move analyzed and enhanced 
through predictive optimization, customized reciprocity, and further analysis. The singular 
stuff of life that was once sheltered under the umbrella of political power has become the 
umbrella itself, underneath it, power is protected (see: neoliberalism and governmentality). 
As a result, nothing escapes the ever-seeing eye of the automatic engineer.  
 
3. The grammar of language and platform:  Language, which is a symbolic representation, is 
subject to grammar. Historically, many types of mimetic representation have escaped from 
the prescriptive character of grammaticization. While descriptive grammar is considered as 
a less repressive approach to language than its prescriptive cousin, it is merely a waystation 
on the road to grammatizing everyday life, which heretofore, had been largely resistant to 
normalization. While human behavior is loosely organized by norms and expectations, social 
life tends to reward deviation and surprise in inverse proportion to the degree to which 
normative expectations dominate. In other words, manners and customs enable tactical 

play, and these subversions are the spice of life. However, the advent of digital platforms as 
spaces for everyday life present a challenge to these kinds of tactical subversions. The 
common notion that if you can think of it, you can find it on the internet is more of a curse 
than a blessing. Those who are obsessed with normality have no trouble finding it. Those of 
us (and we all do so in our own ways) who struggle against conformity must now drive 
further to find it. This might create some interesting possibilities for subculture, but it has a 
way of accelerating anti-social tendencies by requiring more from would-be deviants than 
they would otherwise require in a metastable locality. The coupling of extreme normativity 
with ever-radicalizing notions of resistance provides excellent fodder for machine learning 
while wreaking havoc on livable communities. Platforms have accelerated conflict and while 
strip-mining the pleasure of the everyday.  

 

4. Aestheticizing politics. We often think of “the aestheticization of politics” in relation to 
the way in which fascist regimes wrap themselves in aesthetic packaging to fabricate a 
picture of social unity. To this, Benjamin introduces an oppositional tendency, the 
“politicization of art.” Debord does a better job in the Society of the Spectacle, by pointing 
to the collective formation itself as that which has been “aestheticized.” In other words, the 
masses themselves cease to be “political” in the sense that they are no longer a site of 
conflict in which the actions of the state are produced. Instead, the masses exist as a proxy 
for the expression of the will of the state, they are a spectacular form used to legitimate the 
actions of power, rather than the participants in a more Arendtian vision of the public 
sphere in which the demos negotiates the production of power. This distinction works very 
well with the contemporary American conception of politics—two parties representing 
competing styles of governance, with policy produced by leadership, mediated through the 
elite pluralist model.  Here, politics is something we subscribe to, like Netflix streaming into 
our lives, without access to the means of its production (though we are told that in 
subscribing and selecting with streams to view, we provide the necessary input for the 
creation of the content we wish to access). In this respect, our political system is thoroughly 
aestheticized following the advent of social media, where a tight feedback loop is created 
between the public sphere as an object of consumption. Thus, when we think of the 
aestheticization of politics, we might do well to go deeper than the casual understanding of 
American electoral politics and, even, Benjamin’s prescient discussion in “The Work of Art in 
the Age of Mechanical Reproduction.” Stiegler’s notion of “adoption,” which is discussed in 
Symbolic Misery, performs the necessary reframing of this question in the contemporary 
moment. It is the public itself that has become aestheticized, and thus politics along with it, 
a process which may not be possible without the enormous apparatus of social networks, 
which make the surveillance, organization, and grammaticization of the everyday possible. 
Downstream from this, we see the pathological performances of symbolic misery itself as 
the political gesture par excellence of American consciousness—the collapse of community, 
the thorough commodification of the self, the fungibility of everything, punctuated by 
desperate attempts to reclaim the singularity—through ever broadening regimes of 
sousveillance, through hyperbolic performances of affect, through customized modifications 
of a self that we no longer believe in, through competitive taste cultures, through works of 
art entangled in absurd cryptographic schemes, etc. In other words, platforms do the 
ideological work of normalizing social collapse as progress towards the rationalized 
reorganization of body politic into "taste communities" and other post-digital 
demographies. This is the upheaval phase of what the Davos crowd calls the “Fourth 

Industrial Revolution,” and the proletarianization process proceeds with culture as its 
terrain. Your hopes and dreams are tropes and memes. 
 
6. Gastropoetics: In spite of the great wave of rationalism that we are living through, there 
are plenty of moments and places where people still live human lives. Even in Amazon 
warehouses and the new plantations of global manufacturing, people continue to live, in 
spite of the totalizing aspirations of their expert managers (and their machine intelligence). 
People still break laws, violate norms, and flout received opinions, so the situation is not 
hopeless. For though there are traitors who are seduced into imitating the logic of 
surveillance and control (typically, who imagine that they will share in the monitoring and 
administration of order and that compliance will protect them from their own deficiencies), 
the nature of such a control society is not to eliminate pirates, rather it is to make pirates of 
us all. If the panoptic gaze teaches us the virtue of self-regulation at the service of the cop in 
the tower, then the extrapolation of panopticism towards a universal accountability to the 
massive digital apparatus also places us all in a universal default. The always-on, eternally-
archived, pseudo-omniscience of the network makes us all vulnerable to it (not necessarily 
for what it knows, but for what it claims to know). And every bit of ourselves we obscure or 
reserve is a crime against the empire. We are all guilty. We are all fugitives from the law. We 
are all pirates. The choice we face each day is whether to become privateers or be free. The 
sooner we accept this is the ethical terrain of the 21st Century, the sooner we reclaim our 
vita activa from the prescribed, performative pseudopopulism of platform spaces. The 
aporia in meaning is not an artifact of language belched into existence by grammatical 
dysfunction. It is not an engineering problem to be solved by a sociopathic wunderkind with 
a quantum computer. It is your différance which makes a difference. And, so, the emerging 
control society forces us to take sides—do we anoint ourselves with the authority of 
illegitimate power and use our vulnerability to negotiate a decoding strategy that papers 
over its brutal errors? Or do we live lives of lawless imagination, in a constant state of 
dissemblance against our own aestheticization? The aporia is in your belly. 
 
Eater-Response Theory: Gastropoetics is not the last pirate ship sailing the seas of 
consciousness. I only wish to hold it up as one practice that does something difficult but 
necessary, something between a “moveable feast” and a “last meal,” that defers definition 
and achieves a kind of poetic resistance to the rapacious instrumental drive of platform 
spaces. While Gastropoetics is a marginal practice, these culinary experiments explore the 
relational dynamics of cooking, hospitality, and eating as persistent humanistic practices, 
even as such practices are increasingly mediated by emergent practices like "food selfies" 
and other performative taste practices. Instead, this is a call for a hundred thousand billion 
such marginal practices, with many more being hatched in the imagination. Such a world is 
closer than we think, as this practice is already in progress, the only thing it lacks is our will 
to think it. The possible world is not one we are burdened with bringing into being, the 
possible world is the unrealized world that we desire.  
 
Key to understanding the appeal of gastropoetics is the ad hoc nature of human production 
and consumption (see de Certeau's "everyday life") performed under the constraints of the 
generated menu, of the platform, and of the mnemotechnical system itself. Over the past 
few years, I have been lucky to be a guest Talan Memmott’s test kitchen for The Limerick 
Diet in March 2019 (joined by guest diners Carrie Heckman and Joseph Tabbi) and 

Quarantine Quatrains at ELO 2020. And while these events are documented and it is 
possible to replay these events in various capacities. Memmott and Rettberg’s The Limerick 
Diet was performed on July 15, 2019 at the ELO Conference in Cork, Ireland. Randomly 
selected guests were invited to sit for an evening of dinner and drinks at an off-site house, 
while the “audience” watched via livestream. The instigating element of the event is the 
text generated menu (http://retts.net/limerickdiet/go.html). For those who wish to look at 
the constituent parts of the text generator, that can be most easily found here: 
http://retts.net/limerickdiet/. The specific menus from the July 2019 event are published on 
the Gastropoetics Facebook site 
(https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?story_fbid=2080708585556671&id=20142652
78867669). At this point, we can marvel at the skill with which the javascript generators that 
combine ingredients, culinary techniques, and thematic elements to create Limericks which 
function as menu items for the guests. Complicating things a bit are the local, seasonal, 
thematic, and technical constraints that undoubtedly informed the content of the arrays—
as whatever is generated must, in turn, be prepared by Memmott and Rettberg. 
Furthermore, there is also the hope that the combinations also provide pleasure to the 
guests. Hence, the writing/programming task of building a text generator like this requires 
an attention to what will ultimately be possible (and, more importantly, to what will be 
good).   
 
As is the case for much of electronic literature, the outcome for this project is not a static 
published text. But further than that, there is no artifact that encapsulates the work, either. 
In the case of a work like Montfort and Strickland’s Sea and Spar Between (2010), the work 
contains a staggering array of possible reading experiences, but all exist as a finite (and 
quite specifically coordinated) range of combinations that are bound within the artifact that 
is the code base.  Similarly, the initial iteration of Montfort’s Taroko Gorge (2009), while it 
builds stanzas randomly in real time as the work runs in your browser, is also a bounded 
object whose entirety can be understood by examining its code. 
 
Or can it? A work like Taroko Gorge, as elegant as it is as a standalone work, has achieved 
widespread attention thanks to the wave of remixes that it has inspired. The ever-growing 
list includes works of varied quality, some of which could stand alone as unique 
achievements, but all of which are enriched through the discursive space opened up by the 
originating work. This highlights an interesting fact of the literary—while professors and 
their students are often trained to collect works of art as artifacts to be subjected to a 
hermeneutic process—the pleasure of the literary contains its own gratifications. And while 
I am not going to provide a complete taxonomy of these gratifications, I will describe a 
particular kind of gratification that this work illustrates—that of an instigating moment. For 
many readers, a work like Taroko Gorge initiates a process of decoding, translation, and 
experimentation. The pleasure such an experience provides can be as simple as a moment 
of “realization” when one peers at the source code and understands the ingredients to the 
recipe, when one analyzes competing versions and enjoys the detournements of the text, 
when one copies the work into a text editor and creates a new page that runs from their 
desktop, when one creates a semantic system that works with Montfort’s engine, when one 
creates a compelling text generator of their own, and/or when one enters into a community 
with other hijackers. José Aburto’s Grita (2005), which requires readers to scream the poem 
into their browser; Judd Morrissey’s LAMENT (2017), which is a live performance informed 

by a generated substrate; or ALIS’s Typomatic (2015), which is platform that creates visual 
poems using words furnished by guests, are just a few works that are best understood as 
machines created to initiate processes.  Viewed in this context, Memmott and Rettberg’s 
experiments in gastropoetics represent an extended instance of literature as an instigating 
process (rather than a bound text that itself is a performance of distinction as erudition, the 
extreme example being something like Norton Anthology). Instead of adding a dead text to 
one’s cultural repertoire (as we do when preparing for exams or cultivating a social media 
profile), a gastropoetic menu is a pinpoint on a long arc of practice, preceded by countless 
hours of noodling in the kitchen, tasting, sipping, giving, receiving, hacking, and repeating. 
The menu is succeeded by a meandering evening, beginning with a game by which the 
guests create and name a cocktail from randomly selected cards, continuing with chefs in 
the kitchen, guests at the table, beverages and plates passing in and out of spaces, dynamic 
conversations—the meal itself is the scaffolding for an elaborate and unpredictable social 
interaction. 
 
While I did not dine at the July 2019 Limerick Diet (I only tuned in and out of the video 
stream), the March 31, 2019 test kitchen at Memmott’s home offered an opportunity to 
experience the experience more fully. Joined by Carrie Heckman and Joe Tabbi, Memmott 
invited us to sit for an evening of machine generated meals. We begin the evening with a 
card game, and though I do not remember all the particulars, I felt fairly lucky to be dealt a 
hand of cards which I parlayed into something called “Cayley’s Regret,” a kind of modified 
Mesoamerican Manhattan, made from mezcal, sweet vermouth, a splash of bitters and 
black pepper, with maraschino cherries. Talan, on the other hand, enjoyed the now 
infamous “Patchwork Mule”—whiskey and sweet vermouth garnished with black pepper 
and sardine coated in candy sprinkles. Aided by a bit of alcohol, the evening progressed via 
the following menu: 
 

The Winona Test Kitchen Menu March 30, 2019 
(https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?story_fbid=2016833898610807&id=201
4265278867669) 
 
*AMUSE BOUCHE* 
 
INISHBOFIN COD LIBERTINE 
In Inishbofin they serve up some Cod 
Made with Courgettes a very fine scrod 
        Broiled with White Wine and garlic 
        Sure to get a like click 
Oh, that toothsome Inishbofin Cod 
 
TIPPERARY PRAWN OBSCENE 
In Tipperary they have the best Prawns 
Served with Local Greens to turn diners to swans 
        Broiled with White Wine, Capers, and garlic 
        Will not make you sick 
You'll die for those Killarney Prawns 
 

KILKENNY PRAWN ANTHROPOCENE 
In Kilkenny they serve up some Prawns 
Served with Heirloom Tomatoes that soon will be gone 
        Sauteed with White Wine, Sesame, and thyme 
        Made for primetime 
You'll die for those Kilkenny Prawns 
 
DUNDALK COD SERPENTINE 
In Dundalk they serve up some Cod 
Made with Heirloom Tomatoes fit for a God 
        Steamed with Butter, Dill, and thyme 
        In a brocade of lime 
Nothing better than Dundalk Cod 
 
*MAIN COURSE* 
 
DINGLE FOWL DU MONDE 
The Broiled Fowl and Edamame of Dingle 
With Garlic-Mustard Sauce makes you tingle 
        With enough Mushrooms 
        For sure to crush gloom 
Don't miss the Broiled Fowl in Dingle  
 
GALWAY FOWL ZAMBONI 
There was a Oulipian from Galway 
Whose Cayenne-Red Wine Sauce is made in the French way 
        Topped with Pop Rocks 
        Like wearing clown socks 
Oh! the Broccoli and Cayenne of Galway 
 
CORK BEEF NAPOLEON 
There was a Beef-Monger from Cork 
Whose Garlic-Vodka Sauce was historic 
        Add Some Mushrooms 
       Whizbang and zoom zoom 
Oh! the Beef is fantastic in Cork  
 
DUBLIN BEEF DE RIGEUR 
There is a Beef dish known in Dublin  
Pan-Roasted with Au Jus is quite humblin' 
        So many Hot Peppers 
        Spliced in like striped zebras 
Oh! the Onions and Cinnamon of Dublin 

 
I remember my meal (Kilkenny Prawn Anthropocene and the Cork Beef Napoleon), but 
more importantly I remember the evening (as if through my own eyes). As it pertains to the 
specifics of the meal, I remember being excited and curious to see how the meal would 

progress from menu to table. Joe had made a trip to Winona to visit in advance of an 
international move to Bergen, Norway. Talan had offered up the opportunity of an 
experimental meal, and invited Carrie to join us. But we all knew that we were being treated 
to test-run of a project that had been in the works for months. So, we sat down at the table, 
dealt us the cards with which we played out our cocktails. The winner would select the first 
machine-generated menu. And so the evening began. 
 
A menu exists as a kind of contractual space, between which a restaurant and a diner agree 
upon a set of expectations. The kitchen agrees to provide what is described on the menu 
and the diner agrees to pay for this meal, in between there is the work of preparation and 
consumption, both of which exist beyond the instrumental contractual obligation between 
the two parties. Here, the chef has knowledge, skill, and varying degrees of latitude to 
interpret the meal as it is prepared. The guest has expectations and tastes that ultimately 
test the activity of the chef.  Apart from the “agreement,” the experience is a social 
interaction mediated by service, ambience, conviviality at table, and the meal itself. In this, 
the guest and chef play their part, but there are many variables at play. In a perfect world, 
meals provide the pretext for a kind of radical hospitality and conviviality.  
 
However, we are also accustomed to purely instrumental and industrialized forms of eating. 
Famine and hunger at one end dictate a purely expedient form of eating, in which getting 
food into an empty belly takes priority over all other considerations.  Similarly, cultures of 
efficiency provide us with constrained moments of consumption—the grab and go meal, the 
fastfood kitchen, convenience cooking—all of which provide a kind of relief from stress and 
mark a kind of material abundance that masks a kind of spiritual poverty at the core of 
prosperous societies.  Finally, there is a kind of pathological eating, which can be excessive 
or constrained, that provides a kind hypernourishment or hyponourishment, which is 
characterized by a kind of carelessness. When I say carelessness, I do not mean to say that 
the act itself is entirely devoid of care, indeed many kinds of careless activities are driven by 
an excess of a kind of care at the expense of another. For instance, neoliberal rhetorics of 
self-care co-opt the necessary affirmations of desire that encourage the improverished or 
enfeebled to access sustenance that is routinely denied to the underclass by puritanical 
cultures. Nevertheless, such discourses have been adopted to rationalize a host of 
indulgences within privileged social segments as a form of moral preening meant to mask 
basic hedonic drives. There is nothing wrong with pursuing pleasure in many cases, but 
there is something uniquely perverse to appropriate the suffering of others to legitimate 
indulgence as it reaffirms the notion that one must enjoy oneself only with permission to do 
so. And, in neoliberal society, this kind of self-care exists alongside a corresponding 
discourse about transactionalizing hedonic interactions, which has the ironic effect of 
further stigmatizing working class pleasure by claiming “self-care” for those who can afford 
it and marginalizing free and collaborative conviviality as a source of restoration. 
 
Without getting lost in close reading, there are larger observations about the experience of 
The Limerick Diet. The first is an appreciation for the challenge that exists at the heart of the 
project—the chefs set out a kind challenge for themselves that they must meet in the 
context of a live performance for real guests. While the stakes might not be “life or death,” 
success or failure are real possibilities, as the guests may not enjoy the meal. On the other 
hand, the guests are caught up in the fun of witnessing the chef’s challenge, making the 

gastropoetic experience a game about “making do,” about the triumph of skill over 
uncertainty, and a significant portion of the time of waiting at the table concerned with 
seeing what will happen. Too often, we tend to eat without thinking, reserving this kind of 
anticipation for special occasions (and even then, probably spending less time wondering 
what our meal will be like). The spectacle of human vs. machine is significant here, and the 
skill of execution rests heavily on the shoulders of the chefs, as the techniques, ingredients, 
tastes, and skills all present meaningful constraints on execution. (The Quarantine 
Quatrains, which was based on a remote event in which viewers were invited to participate 
from home using ingredients on hand, tested this dimension of gastropoetics further.) 
 
Now, it is possible, of course that in the future, machine generated menus will become a 
commonplace in fastfood kitchens. Similarly, directly machine generated foodstuffs may 
attempt to obviate chefs altogether. As it is, the Taco Bell menu is a permutational project 
that creates novel menu items based on a fairly constrained pantry of items and Burger King 
has already begun exploring the possibility of using AI to generate orders for identifiable 
customers. As a scholar of digital and mass media, I fully expect that it is inevitable that 
some will declare the machine generated meal delivered without human contact to be 
equal to or better than any human culinary accomplishment. We are cursed with a twofold 
tendency to: 1) embrace a kind of pseudopopulism that declares all mass market 
commodities to be of superlative aesthetic merit on account of their market share (millions 
of fans can’t be wrong); and 2) to embrace a posthuman attitude towards intelligence which 
prefers technological achievement over human handiwork (or reserves the enjoyment of 
the hand-made as a kind of “artisanal” excess for elite consumers). In the end, who am I to 
say that AI generated music or art or food is better than what I can make with my own 
hands?  Who do you trust?  A capricious idiot using cultural concepts inherited from 
geriatric nobodies? Or a multibillion dollar corporation with supercomputers, a massive 
surveillance database, and an army of engineers? We know the answer to that question, 
because we answer it every day when we privilege platform capitalism over people. 
 
So, these kinds of procedural experiments that employ machine processes to initiate human 
fecundity are critical to life in the 21st Century. Or, the signatories of Ars Industrialis’ 
“Manifesto” declare, we must “struggle against carelessness [incurie], against the 
destruction of attention” (the Latin root, cura, gives us our words care, concern, healing, 
curing, and curiosity). And where we cease to attend to the value of human consciousness, 
we resign ourselves to inhuman existence. In thinking of the literary as something akin to 
eating a meal, something we do with others, that is nourishing and transient, that cannot be 
easily written down, that negotiates a variety of constraints, abilities, and desires in a 
moment of conviviality, we reclaim the popular from the mass. We take back this notion of 
popular as something we participate in (as something that belongs to the common people 
and to common experience that can be at once commonplace and singular) rather than 
something we merely consume (a mass commodity or a platform that is packaged in a 
prescribed affective relation).   
 
I am not confident that we will win (by we, I am not talking about the leadership class, I am 
talking about everyone else). It is always possible, and increasingly likely, that we will be 
overtaken by machine intelligence, not because it will serve us perfectly, but it might be 
decided that such intelligence adequate for our needs. Nor do I think that a kooky machine 

generated poetic menu prepared by a friend for the enjoyment of a small group of people 
will alter the course of human history. Rather, I think billions of such practices must occur 
(as they surely do), and that we must be here as scholars to receive those paradigital 
occasions with an emphasis and curiosity about their social dimensions against the 
relentless prioritization of the machine processes that may or may not provoke them. 
 
References 
 
Arendt, Hannah. The Human Condition. University of Chicago Press: 1956. 
 
Ars Industrialis.  “Manifesto.” 2010. http://arsindustrialis.org/manifesto-2010 
 
Benjamin, Walter. “The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction.” Trans. Harry 
Zohn.  Marxists.org. 1998 [1936]. 
https://www.marxists.org/reference/subject/philosophy/works/ge/benjamin.htm 
 
Debord, Guy. The Society of the Spectacle. Trans. Greg Adargo. Marxists.org: 1977 (1967). 
https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/debord/society.htm 
 
de Certeau, Michel.  The Practice of Everyday Life. Trans. Steven Rendall, University of 
California Press: 1984. 
 
Stiegler, Bernard. Symbolic Misery, vol. 2. Trans. Barnaby Norman. Polity: 2015. 
 
 
 
 

