Dystopic plagiarized platforms: found text, corrupted code, and robotic poetics. 
 
Abstract: 
 
The (auto)biography of 김정은 (2020) is a conceptual ‘found’ artwork in VII parts. It 
combines found code with found text. Multiple ‘found’ computational pieces have been 
modified with vocabulary drawn from multiple speeches delivered by the current North 
Korean Leader, Kim Jong-un/김정은. In addition, vocabulary and phrases from journalism 
critical of the North Korean regime are also incorporated into these generative works. On the 
one hand, this work is an experiment in propaganda delivery: it emulates the relentlessness of 
the North Korean indoctrination machine and shows how born-digital writing can be stolen 
and misused; in so doing, it reveals digital literature’s power. As part of this process, a Kim 
Jong-un ‘poetic robot’ has been created to demonstrate how such propaganda might be 
delivered/forced upon a populace. This work also seeks to capture the perspective of a 
curious, intelligent yet powerless North Korean citizen and demonstrate how they might 
(struggle to) engage with local culture. This paper reflects on this artwork in relation to 
Critical Code Studies (Marino, 2020). Specifically, it looks at how code can be adopted and 
exploited. Through practice-led research (Smith and Dean, 2009), this work deliberately 
exploits the code of multiple digital poets in order to show how such works might be 
corrupted. These subsequent works can be regarded as an example of third generation 
electronic literature (Flores, 2019). These works can also be regarded as an example of ‘overt 
plagiarism’ (Holland-Batt and Jeffery, 2020). If the works’ ‘fictional’ construction is 
believed, then it would be an example of ‘covert plagiarism’. Additionally, this paper looks at 
how this code and corrupted poetry could be reformed into robotic poetics (Winder, 2004). 
Through this extension to robotic poetics, this paper extends the notion of Critical Code 
Studies, by extending it to robotics, and interrogating what impact such an artefact has on 
transforming the initial work. 
 
Key words: 
Robotic Poetics – Dystopia – Overt Plagiarism – Found Text – Code Studies 
 
 

 

The (auto)biography of 김정은 is a conceptual ‘found’ artwork in VII parts. It combines 
found code with found text. Multiple ‘found’ computational pieces have been modified with 
vocabulary drawn from multiple speeches delivered by the current North Korean Leader, 
Kim Jong-un/김정은. In addition, vocabulary and phrases from journalism critical of the 
North Korean regime has also been incorporated into these generative works. This work 
represents a ‘dystopic platform’. On the one hand, this work is an experiment in propaganda 
delivery: it emulates the relentlessness of the North Korean indoctrination machine and 
shows how born-digital writing can be stolen and misused; in so doing, it reveals digital 
literature’s power. As part of this process, with the input and assistance of Canadian 
industrial automation specialist Brett Griffin and Griffin Prototyping, a Kim Jong-un ‘poetic 
robot’ was created to demonstrate how such propaganda might be delivered/forced upon a 
populace. This paper reflects on this artwork, specifically in relation to how code can be 
adopted and exploited. In addition to exploring hypothetical propaganda platforms, this 
project also seeks to capture the perspective of a curious, intelligent, yet powerless North 
Korean citizen and demonstrate how they might (struggle to) engage with local culture. The 
work can be regarded as an example of ‘overt plagiarism’ (Holland-Batt and Jeffery, 2020), 
though within the diegetic ‘world’ of the piece, the smaller works would be regarded as 
‘covert plagiarism’. Similarly, the broader work as a whole would be regarded as an example 
of second generation electronic literature, while the smaller works within the diegetic world 
of the work could be regarded as examples of third generation electronic literature (Flores, 
2019). Additionally, this paper looks at how code and corrupted poetry can be reformed into 
robotic poetics (Winder, 2004) and possibilities. Through an examination of this extension to 
robotics, this paper further interrogates what impact such an artefact has on transforming the 
initial code. 

The initial inspiration for this work was to corrupt existing digital literature using the 

perspective and vocabulary of a totalitarian force. Six digital poetic works from the 
publication Taper (an online literary magazine for small computational pieces) were chosen: 
for the pool players at the Golden Shovel by Lillian-Yvonne Bertram, US by Nick Montfort, 
If Jupiter had turned into a Star by Everest Pipkin, Thermodynamics by Sebastian Bartlett, 
Rise by Angela Chang, and ((((0)))) by Eugenio Tisselli. Works from Taper were chosen for 
two reasons. Firstly, the code of works published in Taper is free to use and open source. 
Secondly, Taper’s submissions have clearly defined set parameters: works must not use any 
external libraries or APIs, nor link to any external resources, including fonts; and the works 

 

1 

must not exceed more than 2KB (2048 bytes). Therefore, these works allowed for a level of 
similarity that would allow the reader to consistently compare the impact on the various 
individual works. The vocabulary in these computational works was replaced with 
vocabulary taken from North Korean propaganda and works critical of the North Korean 
regime. Part I uses text of a speech delivered by Kim Jong Un at the military parade held in 
celebration of the 70th founding anniversary of the KPA, as reported and translated by the 
Korean Central News Agency and North Korea: no liberty, humour, irony ... no love by 
Christopher Hitchens. Part II uses vocabulary taken from text of a speech delivered by Kim 
Jong Un at the grand banquet hosted by Xi Jinping at the Great Hall of the People on March 
28, 2018, as reported and translated by the Korean Central News Agency and The Aquariums 
of Pyongyang: Ten Years in the North Korean Gulag, by Kang Chol-hwan and Pierre 
Rigoulot. Part III uses phrases taken from Kim Jong Un's 2019 New Year Address and North 
Korea: Everything you need to know about the country by the BBC. Part IV uses vocabulary 
taken from the Joint Statement of President Donald J. Trump of the United States of America 
and Chairman Kim Jong Un of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea at the Singapore 
Summit and When North Korea Falls by Robert D. Kaplan. Part V uses phrases taken from 
the Panmunjeom Declaration for Peace, Prosperity and Unification of the Korean Peninsula 
and Tall storey? North Korea's infamous 'Hotel of Doom' to open shortly, maybe by Justin 
McCurry. Part VI takes vocabulary from The Feats Performed by the Great Victors Will 
Remain for Ever and Kim Jong Un has quietly built a 7,000-man cyber army that gives North 
Korea an edge nuclear weapons don't by Ellen Ioanes.  

This paper/project is an example of practice-led research. Practice-led research is 

defined by Smith and Dean (2009) as: 

 
an activity which can appear in a variety of guises across the spectrum of practice and 
research. It can be basic research carried out independent of creative work (though it 
may be subsequently applied to it); research conducted in the process of shaping an 
artwork; or research which is the documentation, theorisation and contextualisation of 
an artwork – and the process of making it – by its creator. (3) 

 
This research, then, is a combination of all three of Smith and Dean’s definitions. Smith and 
Dean continue to argue that the term ‘practice-led research and its affiliates (practice-based 
research, practice as research)’ (5) are used to make two arguments about practice. First, ‘the 
creative work in itself is a form of research and generates detectable research outputs’ (5). 

 

2 

The work can also be regarded as a work of ‘overt plagiarism’ (Holland-Batt and 

The second argument suggests that creative practice can lead to specialised research insights 
(6). This paper, then, is an example of Smith and Dean’s second argument in that it 
‘highlights the insights, conceptualisation and theorisation which can arise when artists 
reflect on and document their own creative practice’ (6). 
 
Jeffery, 2020). The concept of found poetry – such as the cento as explored by the Dadaists 
and surrealists and more recently in works by American conceptual poet Kenneth Goldsmith, 
who regards poetry as an act of ‘uncreative writing’ or ‘curation and transcription’ – could be 
applied to this work. Within the diegetic world of the broader work, however, the code 
utilised could be regarded as ‘covert plagiarism’. Covert plagiarism is defined as works that 
attempt to conceal theft. For example, Graham Nunn’s ‘Platypus’ uses scaffolded plagiarism 
to ‘covertly’ plagiarise Helen Dunmore’s ‘Heron’ (Passmore, 2013). Though Nunn later 
argued that he was performing a work of overt plagiarism, the lack of acknowledgement in 
the initial publication suggests otherwise. Similarly, the use of code by the fictional North 
Korean propagandists the work imagines would most certainly go unacknowledged. 
 
The (auto)biography of 김정은can also be regarded as an example of second 
generation electronic literature that contains third generation work. The second generation of 
electronic literature, Flores (2019) argues, begins in 1995 with the Web. This generation 
consists of ‘innovative works created with custom interfaces and forms’. This generation 
continues into the present. The third generation, Flores proposes, starts around 2005. These 
digital works use ‘established platforms with massive user bases, such as social media 
networks, apps, mobile and touchscreen devices, and Web API services’. This generation 
coexists with the second. The (auto)biography of 김정은 as a whole should be regarded as a 
second generation work of electronic literature. Contained within the work, however, are 
numerous shorter works that repurpose digital works from Taper. In and of themselves, these 
works would be regarded as third generation electronic literature. 
 
‘in digital literary practices code should be regarded as a meta-authority that denotes 
authority to specific components of the work’. The (auto)biography of 김정은 confirms this 
proposal. While the code of any work of electronic literature has the authority to denote 
power to the media fragments within the work, it does not have authority in and of itself. In 
Critical Code Studies (2020), Marino writes: 
 

In my paper, Collaboration and authority in electronic literature (2020), I argued that 

 

3 

But the code is not enough in itself. It is crucial to explore context. Who wrote the 
code? When and why? In what language was the code written? What programming 
paradigm was used? Was it written for a particular platform (hardware or software)? 
How did the code change over time? What material or social constraints impacted the 
creation of this code? How does this code respond to the context in which it was 
created? How was the code received by others? [my italics] (28) 

 
These latter italicised questions are of interest. In this work, I have proposed that a fictional 
North Korean propagandist has, within the social constraints of DPRK, appropriated this 
code. Through this work, which filters critical works of the DPRK into DPRK propaganda, I 
have also attempted to create what the experience may be like for an intelligent yet powerless 
North Korean citizen, and show how they might (fail to) engage with local culture. Firstly, 
the vocabulary is made up predominantly of propaganda, but it also contains comparatively 
smaller amounts of vocabulary drawn from works critical of North Korea. The final digital 
products therefore contain traces of criticism, but it is never potent enough to be persuasive. 
Yet beyond this vocabulary, there is also the retained code of the Taper works. Part of this 
practice-led research’s purpose is to develop a work to test whether or not the poetics of the 
code itself communicated something fundamental that is perhaps in conflict with the 
intentions of the North Korean propaganda. Certainly, none of the creators of the original 
Taper works are North Korean propagandists. 

It is therefore perhaps also important to disclose my own relationship to the DPRK. 

On a personal level, I have some experience with North Korea: as a lecturer at Tsinghua 
University in Beijing, China, I taught a handful of privileged North Korean students; I have 
journeyed to Pyongyang, North Korea with a British filmmaking company, where I engaged 
with a number of very privileged North Koreans; and have (cautiously) discussed these topics 
with North Koreans working in Beijing. The penultimate question posed by Marino (How 
does this code respond to the context in which it was created?), however, indicates that in 
creating and engaging with The (auto)biography of 김정은, one must also read it as a product 
of neoliberalism. The ‘freedom’ to create the work, in and of itself as a ‘faux-propaganda’ 
piece, is as much a product of contemporary neoliberalist culture, and as such provides 
insights into “my” culture as much if not more so than the DPRK’s propaganda network and 
its impact on its citizenry. Propaganda is by no means exclusively practiced by totalitarian 

 

4 

Beyond these generational works, a robotic Kim Jong-Un was created to read the 

regimes. This project therefore encourages readers to reflect on how any platform can be co-
opted and exploited for propagandistic means. 
 
generational works. This emulated a potential propaganda device, similar to the radios 
installed in North Korean homes whose volume can be turned down but never off. Robotic 
poetics theorist Winder (2004) writes: 
 

There is a fundamental link between language and robots. Whatever material 
constitution they may have – arms and legs, cogs and wheels, and engines – the 
crucial ingredients, the ones that separate robots from wrenches, are their instructions. 
Instructions are perhaps inscribed in some concrete medium, but they are 
quintessentially abstract, existing more in the netherworld of code than in concrete 
form. That code netherworld is where humans and robots inevitably meet. It is where 
humans are most robotic and where robots are most human. 

 
Winder defines robotic poetics as ‘the study of robotic authors and the automatic generation 
of creative texts.’ Going further, Winder defines future ‘interwoven problematics’ that 
concern robotic poetics: ‘mechanization, combinatory, virtualization, and abstraction towards 
metastructures.’ These generative works produce ‘new’ content. At the same time, they are 
very much delimited. And it is this delimitation that is ‘exploited’ by the fictional North 
Korean creator of The (auto)biography of 김정은. 
Practice-led research is such that the creative interrogation often raises more questions 
 
than it answers. For now, it appears that on the question of whether or not works of electronic 
literature offer a perfect propaganda platform waiting to be exploited (dystopic) or a 
fundamental artistic impulse that is retained despite potentially nefarious amendments 
(utopic), it is likely not an either/or but a spectrum. I am left feeling much like a curious yet 
powerless North Korean citizen, unsure of what the future of such platforms will be, yet I 
remain alert, constantly listening for the feint traces of truth. 

 

 

5 

WORKS CITED 

 
Flores, L. (2019) ‘Third Generation Electronic Literature’, Electronic Book Review, 7 April, 
at https://electronicbookreview.com/essay/third-generation-electronic-literature/ (accessed 4 
May 2021). 
 
Holland-Batt, S. & Jeffrey, E. (2020) ‘Covert and Overt Plagiarism: On Poetry and Theft’, at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dejfmNxfSMM (accessed 4 May 2021). 
 
Marino, M. (2020) Critical Code Studies, Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Winder, W. (2004) ‘Robotic Poetics’, A Companion to Digital Humanities [ed: Schreilbman, 
S., Siemens, R. & Unsworth, J.], Oxford: Blackwell. 
http://digitalhumanities.org:3030/companion/view?docId=blackwell/9781405103213/978140
5103213.xml&chunk.id=ss1-4-11&toc.id=0&brand=9781405103213_brand (accessed 4 May 
2021). 
 
Passmore, D. (2013) ‘“Mr Poetry” Graham Nunn is facing fresh allegations of plagiarism’, 
Courier Mail, at https://www.couriermail.com.au/news/queensland/mr-poetry82178217-
graham-nunn-is-facing-fresh-allegations-of-plagiarism/news-
story/aad784362f863be3ba2144e2e097a862 (accessed 4 May 2021). 
 
Smith, H. and Dean, R.T. (2009) Practice-led Research, Research-led Practice in the 
Creative Arts. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
 
Wright, D.T.H. (2020) ‘Collaboration and authority in electronic literature’, TEXT, s.i. 59, 
p.1–11, at http://www.textjournal.com.au/speciss/issue59/Wright.pdf (accessed 4 May 2021). 
 
Wright, D.T.H. & Griffin, B. (2020) The (auto)biography of 김정은. http://autokju.net 
(accessed 4 May 2021). 
 

 

6 

