Language |H|as a Virus:   

from figure of thought to experimental laboratory 

Diogo Marques1 

Ana Gago2 

 

1 University of Coimbra, Centre of Portuguese Literature  

2 Catholic University of Portugal, Research Centre for Science and Technology of the Arts 

 
  
 

 I have frequently spoken of word and image as viruses or as acting as viruses, 
 and this is not an allegorical comparison. 
 
William S. Burroughs 
 

 If the computer virus is a technological phenomenon cloaked in the metaphor of biology, 
emerging infectious diseases are a biological phenomenon cloaked in the technological 
paradigm. As with computer viruses, emerging infectious diseases constitute an example of a 
counterprotocol phenomenon. 
  
Alexander Galloway and Eugene Thacker, The Exploit 

 

Modernism is a history of infections: by political movements; by mass culture and 
consumerism; and now by the Internet, information technology, and interactivity. The openness 
to exteriority and its infections is an essential characteristic of the modernist inheritance, and 
that inheritance is the will to reveal the Other within oneself, to become Other, to become 
infected by Otherness. 

Boris Groys, In the Flow 

 

 
From Linguistic Inflection to Artistic Infection 

In  Plague  and  the  Athenian  Imagination  (2007), Robin  Mitchell-Boyask considers  the 
hypothesis of the Athens Plague being responsible for the ways in which Greek tragedies 
were  to  be  performed  after  430  BCE.  According  to  Mitchell-Boyask,  not  only  the 
experience of living in a city ravaged by the plague was reflected in its discourse, “the 
adjacency of the Asklepieion to the Theater of Dionysus was an important part of their 
performative  environment  after  420  and  the  construction  of  the  Asklepieion  itself  was 
part  of  the  Athenian  reaction  to  the  plague.”  (2).  In  order  to  sustain  his  argument, 
Mitchell-Boyask  refers  to  History  of  the  Peloponnesian  War,  a  narrative  in  which  the 
Greek historian Thucydides gives a very detailed textual account with regard to the effects 
of the plague in Athens. Far from being easy and full of rhetorical devices, in every known 
translation of it, the Greek used by Thucydides is subject to new mutations of the original 
strain.  Nonetheless,  in  its  essence,  from  the  description  of  symptoms  and  ways  of 
contagion,  to  the  process  of  creating  immunity,  through  its  description,  the  Plague  of 
Athens seems to hold more or less what characterizes every single pandemic, namely the 

ways in which physical malaise quickly begins to be confused with social malaise 1. Being 
a  text  known  for  its  blurring  of  boundaries  when  it  comes  to  genre  categorizations, 
naturally, language might have something to do with it, for instance, the ways in which 
words  are  interpreted  as  subject  to  mutations,  in  fact  the  very  word  “pestilence”: 
 

Such then was the calamity that had befallen them by which the Athenians were 
sore  pressed,  their  people  dying  within  the  walls  and  their  land  being  ravaged 
without. And in  their distress  they recalled, as was natural,  the following verse 
which their older men said had long ago been uttered: ‘A Dorian war shall come 
and  pestilence  with  it.’  A  dispute  arose,  however,  among  the  people,  some 
contending  that  the  word  used  in  the  verse  by  the  ancients  was  not  λοιμός, 
‘pestilence,’  but  λιμός,  ‘famine,’  and  the  view  prevailed  at  the  time  that 
‘pestilence’  was  the  original  word;  and  quite  naturally,  for  men's  recollections 
conformed to their sufferings. (355; our emphasis) 

From Sophocles’ King Oedipus to Boccaccio’s Decameron, Shakespeare’s King Lear or 
Daniel Defoe’s A Journal of the Plague Year, the experience of different pandemics by 
these  and  other  authors  seems  to  add  other  layers  of  meaning  to  William  Burroughs’ 
reflections  on  language  as  a  virus,  namely  in  their  variations,  changes,  ambiguities, 
errors, accidents, and/or mutations. In the 1970s, Burroughs was mainly thinking of the 
ways in which writing as a technology is an alien virus that goes undetected because it 
has a perfect symbiosis with its host. (5). If we are to recognize that language and viruses 
coexist with the experience and repercussion of every single pandemic, to what extent the 
concept  of  virality  may  suffer  a  new  mutation  by  influence  of  COVID-19,  most 
particularly one that is specifically connected to digital media and the Internet? 
 
In  his  2016  book,  In  the  Flow,  Boris  Groys  elaborates  on  Kazimir  Malevich’s  idea  of 
“infection” among several art styles such as Cubism and Suprematism. Comparing the 
straight  lines  of  Suprematism  to  the  rectilinear  organic  form  known  as  the  bacillus  of 
tuberculosis, just as the latter is able to modify its body, Groys tells us how Malevich is 
able to describe the ways in which “novel visual elements introduced into the world by 
new technical and social developments modify the sensibility and nervous system of the 
artist”. However, from the moment he applies the trope of biological evolution to artists 
and  the  teaching  of  arts,  Malevich  subverts  the  logic  of  immunization  inherent  to  the 
whole  metaphor.  This  way,  instead  of  incorporating  “new  aesthetic  bacilli,  to  survive 
them  and  find  a  new  inner  balance,  a  new  definition  of  health”,  artists  “should  not 
immunize themselves against these bacilli, but on the contrary accept them and let them 
to destroy the old, traditional art patterns.” (76-78) Consequently: 
 

The body of the artist may die, but the bacilli survive that death – and begin to 
infect  the bodies of other artists. That  is  why Malevich actually  believes in the 
transhistorical character of art. Art is material and materialist. And that means that 
art can always survive the end of all the purely idealist, metaphysical projects – 
whether Kingdom of God or Communism. (78) 
 

The idea of hijacking the whole logic of the immune system of arts (and artists) is not far 
from the ways in which computer viruses and digital virality came to be understood. In 

1  The  word  used  by  Thucydides  is  anomía  (ἀνομία,  -ας,  'absence  of  law,  rule,  order  or  legality':  ἀ-, 
'deprivation, negation'; νόμος, 'law, rule'), in a description that seems placing phýsis above nómos, the laws 
of nature, for example, hedonistic pleasure, above other types of laws or conventions (354-5). 

 

Digital Contagion (2007), Jussi Parikka highlights that the notion of viral is infectious to 
the point of expanding “into various contexts from cybernetics and computing to biology, 
literature, television, cinema, and media art”, including “philosophical theory and cyber 
theory  in  the  1990s.”  (165).  But,  differently  from  Malevich’s  metaphors  of  biological 
bacilli applied to arts, Parikka’s discussion on viruses goes well beyond the allegorical, 
suggesting that “the digital virus is becoming-biological and that ultimately the biological 
deterritorializes and reterritorializes across different texts and contexts.” (Knight: 2015 
n.p.).  
 
Being  reminiscent  of this article’s initial  epigraph, this layer of literalization  that goes 
beyond its metaphorical  meaning makes us think of  affinities2. In this sense, while the 
notion of virus is a trope of contagion that infects, contaminates, and mutates, from the 
moment  it  became  associated,  by  affinity,  with  digital  media,  it  underwent  a  state  of 
“becoming-biological” (to use Parikka’s expression), ending in a current state of an in-
between. Meaning that, as a permeable trope, through that in-between status, the word 
virus  acts  as  an  interface,  along  different  fields  of  knowledge.  consequently  enabling 
transdisciplinarity.  And  ultimately,  the  Internet,  “a  space  suitable  to  the  spread  of 
contagion and transversal propagation of movement (from computer viruses to ideas and 
affects),”  (Terranova,  as  quoted  in  Parikka:  2010  XXIV),  is  the  perfect  ecosystem 
presenting ideal conditions for the propagation of these rhizomatic reactions. 
 
Through language, not just understood as “communication or about thinking but a force 
that materially connects rhizomatically with its outside”, computer viruses are subject to 
“various assemblages of enunciation (such as mass media acts)”. As such, harmful viruses 
can mean “malicious software, a security problem, but also a piece of net art, an artificial-
life  project  or  a  potentially  beneficial  utility  program”  (XXVIII-XXIX),  a  complex 
definition that is not far from the ways in which virologists Mario Mietzsch and Mavis 
Agbandje-McKenna  talk  of  the  “good  that  viruses  do”,  understanding  the  potential  of 
viruses for the development  of “useful biologics with  therapeutic benefits to  humans.” 
(2017 1). 
 
Accordingly, for them, 
 

If a survey were to ask nonvirologists for their opinions about viruses, the word 
“good” would be unlikely to arise. Instead, words such as “disease,” “infection,” 
“suffering,” or “life-threatening” would likely dominate, as people primarily think 
of viruses such as HIV, Ebola virus, Zika virus, influenza virus, or whatever new 
outbreak is in the news. However, as we are now finding out, not all viruses are 
detrimental to human health. In fact, some viruses have beneficial properties for 
their hosts in a symbiotic relationship, while other natural and laboratory-modified 
viruses  can  be  used  to  target  and  kill  cancer  cells,  to  treat  a  variety  of  genetic 
diseases as gene and cell therapy tools, or to serve as vaccines or vaccine delivery 
agents. (2017 1) 
 

 

2 In Biology, “a measure of the attraction of one biological molecule toward another molecule, either to 
modify it, destroy it, or form a compound with it”. Examples of it being “enzymes and their substrates, or 
antibodies  and 
their  antigens.  https://www.genscript.com/molecular-biology-glossary/8371/affinity. 
Accessed 7 May 2021. 
 

The  idea  of  the  “good”  virus  is  not  limited  to  virology,  however.  In  The  Exploit,  an 
experimental volume made of nodes and edges, Alexander Galloway and Eugene Thacker 
explore the ways in which “the good-virus concept” is transversal to a series of domains. 
Central  to  their  argument  is  the  notion  of  networks,  understood  as  “aggregate 
interconnections of dissimilar subnetworks” (2007 34). Published in 2007, this volume 
by Galloway and Thacker already anticipates what would later become a pandemic. In 
fact, their analysis is so anticipatory of the effects that we are now experiencing to the 
point of being almost indistinguishable, specifically when it comes to understand SARS 
as a new virology of globalization and its associated transgression of boundaries (90): 
 

The SARS virus, for instance, crosses the species boundaries when it jumps from 
animals  to  humans.  It  also  crosses  national  boundaries  in  its  travels  between 
China,  Canada,  the  United  States,  and  Southeast  Asia.  It  crosses  economic 
boundaries, affecting the air travel industry, tourism, and entertainment industries, 
as well as providing initiative and new markets for pharmaceutical corporations. 
Finally, it crosses the nature– artifice boundary, in that it draws together viruses, 
organisms, computers, databases, and the development  of vaccines.  Its  tactic is 
the flood, an age - old network antagonism. (91). 
 

Largely derived from General Systems Theory, Galloway and Thacker’s amplification of 
the principles governing networks enables them to state that, when it comes to infectious 
diseases,  they  “take  advantage  of  a  range  of  networks,  many  of  them  human  made: 
biological  networks  of  humans  and  animals,  transportation  networks,  communications 
networks,  media  networks,  and  sociocultural  networks.”  In  this  sense,  “[m]edia  and 
sociocultural networks can work as much in favor of the virus as against it – witness the 
pervasive  media  hype  that  surrounds  any  public  health  news  concerning  emerging 
infectious diseases.”  (119).  
 
Nonetheless, if, in 2005-2007, Galloway and Thacker’s understanding of the potentially 
nefarious effects of media and sociocultural networks came in association with the fear 
of bioterrorism,  in  2020-2021, in  the midst  of a pandemic, it became linked to  the so-
called  post-truth  era,  namely,  a  populism  and  authoritarianism  marked  by  waves  of 
misinformation.  As  a  network  that  congregates  and,  to  some  extent,  paradoxically 
(im)materializes many other subnetworks – communications, information, socio(cultural) 
networks – the infectious possibilities of Internet seem evident. What possibilities remain, 
then,  for  “good  viruses”  to  take  advantage  of  the  networking  abilities  of  its  (g)host3 
medium? 
 
 
Art in Quarantine: a (post?) pandemic atlas 

Reminiscent  of  a  “good”  viral-like  behaviour  intrinsic  to  mail  art  culture  and 
community(ies) working as subnetworks, project “Art in Quarantine” (AiQ)4 project is an 
online gallery currently hosting more than 900 artworks produced in the first 40 days after 
the Covid-19 pandemic status (March – April 2020) by more than 350 authors from 57 
different countries and aimed to facilitate a safe place for artistic creation and exhibition. 

 

3 Reference to Marcel Duchamp’s famous wordlyphagic wordplay: “A Guest + A Host = A Ghost”, printed 
and  distributed  during  the  opening  of  William  Copley's  show  at  Galerie  Nina  Dausset,  Paris,  1953.  
http://archives.carre.pagesperso-orange.fr/Duchamp%20Marcel.html. Accessed 7 May 2021. 
4 https://wreading-digits.com/art-in-quarantine/ 

In  adopting  several  principles  of  mail  art  culture  to  the  digital  sphere,  namely 
collaborative  practices  as  a  form  of  disrupting  conventional  (art)  channels,  the  AiQ 
project was launched after an international Open Call for (e-)mail art and art via email by 
Portuguese cyberliterature collective wr3ad1ng d1g1t55, making use of mail art channels 
in digital communication – a subnetwork in itself that, to a large extent, already started to 
depend on the Internet to keep its global snail mail circulation alive –as its main strategy 
of promotion. 
 

 
Fig. 1 Art in Quarantine, Interface. Screen Capture.  
https://wreading-digits.com/art-in-quarantine/#all-entries-2 

 

Functioning as a net art installation, it includes an interactive digital map in which users 
can track the arrival of artworks by day and location. Symbolically subverting a logic of 
infection, contamination, and contagion (from Latin contagionem, “a touching, contact”), 
this virtual interface conveys and reveals, day after day, the transmission chain of artistic 
expression, or infection, as proposed by Malevich. 

On  the  whole,  the  gallery  features  artworks  covering  multiple  formats  and  genres  and 
presents  two possible types of display:  an individual gallery, containing the individual 
experiences of each of the participant authors, as well as a collective gallery featuring all 
of the artworks, and presenting yet with another type of experience, that is, the possibility 
of identifying visual patterns from a global experience of confinement due to COVID-
19.  

 
5 https://www.wreading-digits.com.  

 

 
Fig. 2 Art in Quarantine, Collective Gallery. Screen Capture.  
https://wreading-digits.com/art-in-quarantine/#all-entries-2 
 
One  of  the  main  characteristics  of  AiQ  collective  gallery  is  the  fact  of  having  as  an 
inspiration Aby Warburg’s Atlas Mnemosyne project (1929). In its surviving, unfinished 
version, the Atlas Mnemosyne consisted of a series of 63 panels, composed of more than 
900 drawings, prints, newspaper clippings and photographic reproductions of paintings, 
sculptures and everyday objects. Focusing on the Renaissance period but drawing patterns 
of a visual continuity from Ancient Greece to the Republic of Weimar, this fractal-like 
montage  displayed  Warburg’s  attempt  of  representing  two,  often  dueling,  types  of 
responses to psychological and emotional events. As described in the draft “Introduction” 
(“Einleitung”) to the Atlas, the first being a Dionysian, reactive and “phobic-kinetic”, and 
the second an Apollonian, more reflective and “artistically” contained type of response 
(Newman; Hatch n.p.)6. 
 

 
Fig  3.  Atlas  Mnemosyne,  Panel  46,  “Nymph.  'Hurry-Bring-It'  in  Tornabuoni  circle. 
Domestication”. Credits: The Warburg Institute, Cornell University 
https://warburg.library.cornell.edu/  

 

6 https://warburg.library.cornell.edu/image-group/panel-70-introduction-1-5. Accessed 7 May 2021. 
 

 

One of the particularities of the Atlas Mnemosyne is the way in which Warburg applied 
the  concept  of  “bewegtes  Leben”  (life  in  motion  or  animated  life)  to  artistic  images, 
exploring  the  idea  of  “Gebärdensprache”  (language  of  gesture)  as  an  earlier  type  of 
“pathosformel”  (pathos  formula),  composed  by  emotionally  charged  visual  tropes  that 
were directly transmitted from the Antiquity by Renaissance artists. By doing so, as Didi-
Huberman  describes  in  The  Surviving  Image  (2002),  the  author  experiments  on  the 
possibility of assembling an Atlas (or, one could say, a network) of archetypal forms of 
knowledge, memory, and desire, (in)forming western (psycho-emotional) history:  
 

To  this  Warburg  replies  simply  that  images  do  not  call  solely  upon  vision. 
(...) They  do,  at  first,  call  upon  the  act  of  looking,  but  also  upon  knowledge, 
memory,  and  desire,  and  upon  their  capacity,  which  is  always  available,  of 
intensification. This already means that they involve the subject in its totality—
sensorial, psychological, and social. (Didi-Huberman 88-89)  

In  this  sense,  just  like  Malevich,  Warburg  analyses  artistic  images  through  the 
contemplation  of  their  materiality  and  transhistorical  nature,  but,  unlike  the  former, 
associating it with its ability to intensify sensorial and psychological experiences, as well 
as to generate meaning. Following Warburg’s psychoanalytic and iconographic approach, 
it  is  possible  to  identify  some  of  the  themes  or  archetypes  enunciated  by  the  Atlas 
Mnemosyne in AiQ’s galleries, more precisely the tensions and dualities encapsulated in 
these pathos-charged representations  of the pandemic experience.  For instance,  pathos 
formulas of sacrifice and triumph, order and chaos, anger and resignation, ecstasy and 
melancholy, and often abstraction (more or less exuberant or humoristic) as a response 
mechanism to fear – or to what Warburg would call loss of “the how of metaphor” (Hönes 
n.p.)7,  or 
invisible  and 
incomprehensible  threat.  Alongside,  their  corresponding  visual  and  sound  trope-like 
motifs: the contrast between inside and outside life, transparency and opacity, windows 
and screens, stillness and movement, noise and silence, greyness and vividness of colours, 
animistic and geometrical representations of the virus.  

lack  of  recognizable  explanations  when  facing  an 

Another relevant aspect is the way in which artistic representations are indeed permeated 
by digital media aesthetics and apparatus, confirming the idea that digitality and mediates 
every single aspect of this pandemic. Falling under the spectrum of electronic literature, 
the panel of three selected artworks to be further analysed, and regardless of their fractal 
nature,  function  as  organisms  that  are  part  of  a  specific  subnetwork,  or  population.  In 
their self-reflective nature, revealing language as a form of virus in itself, these artworks 
act as distinctive virus strains that make distinct uses of different programming and poetic 
languages for artistic purposes: a mobile screen capture performance, a generative online 
memorial, and a software system/digital art installation. In this sense, this sample also has 
the potential to take even further the idea of written language as a virus on itself, both as 
a figure of thought and an experimental laboratory for artistic/literary creation. 
 
In Status Offline8 Lebanese visual artist and photographer based in Paris, Clara Abi Nader, 
makes use of screen captures and screen recordings of her mobile’s videos, photos and 
text  notes  in  order  to  produce  a  performance  of  an  alternative  daily  life,  while  in 

 

7 https://warburg.library.cornell.edu/image-group/panel-45-introduction. Accessed 7 May 2021. 
8  Part  of  short-video  series,  “Thoughts  on  Screen”.  https://www.claraabinader.com/thoughts-on-screen. 
Accessed 7 May 2021. 
 

confinement. Largely deprived from physical access to the outside world, the colourful 
videos and photographs stored in her mobile phone are used in order to  (re)connect to 
nature, by revisiting a specific selection of  summertime visual tropes. Using a layer of 
textual  notes  intended  to  express  sensorial,  emotional  and  psychological  experiences 
associated  with  her  memories,  the  author  creates  a  fictional  narrative,  an  infectious 
literary  constructo  overlapping  present  reality  indoors,  and  weaving  meaning  into  the 
otherwise isolated videos and images portrayed.  
 

 

 
Fig 4. Status Offline, Clara Abi Nader, 2020. Screen Capture. 
https://wreading-digits.com/art-in-quarantine  
 
During  performance, the device and its mediating action is  always made  visible,  but  a 
sense of proximity, or even intimacy, prevails, whilst it is the medium that grants us access 
to the author’s feelings and thoughts animated through writing. Ironically, this piece ends 
with a disclaimer stating that “Clara isn’t online”, playing with the fictional nature of life 
inside and outside the (digital) screens.  
 
In  our  second  example,  Patient  Zero  (In  Memory  of  Anyone  Unknown  to  Me)9,  by 
Portuguese  digital  artist,  Pedro  Alves  da  Veiga, an  adaptation  of  Elizabeth  Jennings´ 
poem “In Memory Of Anyone Unknown To Me” is used as part of an interactive online 
memorial of a different kind. Mimicking the action of a virus, the poem is hacked and 
transformed into text-dust animated sentences, conveying an additional, visual, layer of 
poetic  meaning;  “From  ashes  to  ashes”.  The  poem  is  then  placed  in  dialogue  with  a 
symbolic  and  interactive  representation  of  the  transmission  chain  of  the  Coronavirus, 
through which the author pays homage to COVID-19 victims worldwide.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 https://pedroveiga.com/patient-zero/  

 

 
Fig 5. Patient Zero (In Memory of Anyone Unknown to Me), Pedro Veiga, 2020. Screen 
Capture. 
https://wreading-digits.com/art-in-quarantine  

 

The individuals are represented by bright blue particles, except for Patient Zero, a single, 
initially  infected  individual,  represented  in  contrasting  red.  Their  real  name,  age  and 
country of origin, generated from actual national databases, are (finally) made visible by 
the author, humanizing otherwise undifferentiated, anonymised particles. By interacting 
with the screen, the observer, whose cursor is presented as “The Economy”, accelerates 
the contact between infected individuals, spreading the disease and increasing the death 
toll. The interaction is accompanied by a soundtrack comprising a slowed down speech 
by Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro, in March 2020, famously comparing Coronavirus 
to a mild flu and condemning lockdown strategies adopted in other countries.  
 
Presenting a distinct form of digital contagion, the third example, viral#c, by polish artist, 
mathematician and composer Robert B. Lisek, is a is a digital rendering of the software 
program developed in the context of a larger project which previously resulted in a video 
and  sound  installation10.The  program  allows  for  the  combination  of  the  author’s  DNA 
sequence with that of different viruses (Lloviu virus, Polio virus, Marburg virus, HIV and 
Ebola virus), which gradually transform the initial sequence, generating new, entwined, 
sequences. The newly generated sequences are then converted, in real time, into pointing 
colour and sound outcomes and retroactively fed back into the machine.  
 

 
10 http://lisek.art.pl/CAPITAL.html  

 
Fig 6. viral#c, Robert B. Lisek, 2020. Screen Capture. 
https://wreading-digits.com/art-in-quarantine  
 
By exposing the wordlyphagic processes present in the interaction of the author’s genetic 
code with that of viruses and other pathological human and nonhuman agents – in this 
case,  the  software  program  that  acts  both  as  a  mediator  and  an  active  coauthor  – 
ultimately, in its AiQ rendering, viral#c reveals that language is indeed a virus, and that 
viruses are language, in whatever form they may take. 

 

Burroughs  understood  language  in  its  material  dimensions  and  infectious  ability  to 
generate and transmit meaning, acting both as a medium and a significant of its own, i.e., 
acting  like  other  cultural/technological  artifacts/mediators  which  assume  a  symbiotic 
behaviour in regard to their (non)human host. Similarly, in applying the idea of “life in 
motion”  to  (artistic)  images,  Aby  Warburg  was  profoundly  influenced  by  the 
technological  production  of  his  time,  namely  the  advances  in  chromatography, 
dynamography  and  the  seismograph.  As  Didi-Huberman  points  out  in  The  Surviving 
Image, Warburg’s notions of the Pathosformel and the Dynamogramm presuppose “an 
energetic  and  dynamic  conception  of  the  trace,  which  is  viewed  as  a  reflexive 
prolongation of the organic movements—mediated, however, by a stylus [style], a word 
that  must  be  understood  in  its  technical  sense  as  well  as  in  the  aesthetic  sense.”  (71). 
Furthermore,  Warburg  would  compare  his  own  work  as  an  historian  to  that  of  a 
seismograph,  when  trying  to  decode  and  translate  the  pathological  shockwaves  of 
historical events amongst his own, interior, experience of the event, the symptom, being 
that the seismic action also necessarily affects the device itself, making it, empathically 
tremble. 
 
Demonstrating  Parikka’s  view  on  the  Internet,  himself  a/effectively  infected  by 
Terranova, the AiQ project is representative of an optimal ecosystem for the propagation 
of  movement,  “often  with  a  special  emphasis  on  bottom-up  emergence”  (2010:  XVII). 
Namely by, taking advantage, (using Galloway and Thacker’s words), on the one hand 
of the Internet, a rhizomatic and viral-like sociocultural subnetwork, and, on the other, 
the  subnetwork  of  artists  in  quarantine,  in  order  to  create  an  online  space  for  benign 
artistic infection.  Constituting at the same time, material and immaterial, the Internet is 
a  potential  experimental  laboratory,  materializing  some  of  the  Coronavirus  own 
characteristics; an airborne transmission virus, made visible only through its tropes (or 
masks) and symptoms. 

References 

Burroughs, William S. The eletronic revolution, Ubu Classic, 2005. 

Didi-Huberman,  Georges.  The  Surviving  Image.  Phantoms  of  Time  and  Time  of 
Phantoms. Trans. Harvey L. Mendelsohn. The Pennsylvania State University Press, 2017. 

Galloway, Alexander R., and Eugene Thacker. The exploit: A theory of networks. Vol. 
21. U of Minnesota Press, 2007. 

Groys, Boris. In the Flow, Verso, 2016. 

Hönes,  Hans  Christian.  “Panel  45  –  Introduction”.  Mnemosyne:  Meanderings  through 
Aby  Warburg’s  Atlas,  https://warburg.library.cornell.edu/image-group/panel-45-
introduction. Accessed 7 May 2021.  

Knight, Kim. “Sublime Latency and Viral Premediation.” electronic book review, Spring 
2015. 
 http://electronicbookreview.com/essay/sublime-latency-and-viral-premediation/. 
Accessed 7 May 2021. 
 
Mietzsch, M., & Agbandje-McKenna, M. “The good that viruses do”, Annual review of 
virology, 4, iii-v, 2017. 

Mitchell-Boyask, Robin. Plague and the Athenian imagination: Drama, history, and the 
cult of Asclepius. Cambridge University Press, 2007. 

Newman,  Jane  O.;  Hatch,  Laura.  “Panel  70  –  Introduction.  The  Baroque  as  the 
Renaissance?”.  Mnemosyne:  Meanderings 
through  Aby  Warburg’s  Atlas, 
https://warburg.library.cornell.edu/image-group/panel-70-introduction-1-5. Accessed 7 
May 2021.  

Parikka, Jussi. Digital contagions: A media archaeology of computer viruses, Peter Lang, 
2010. 

Thacker, Eugene. Biomedia. Vol. 11. U of Minnesota Press, 2004. 

Thucydides.  History  of  the  Peloponnesian  War.  Trans.  Charles  Forster  Smith.  Loeb 
Classical  Library.  Cambridge,  MA:  Harvard  University  Press,  1956.  Available  at: 
https://ryanfb.github.io/loebolus-data/L108.pdf. Accessed 7 May 2021. 

 

