LAB-YRINTHE: 

AN ONLINE LABORATORY TO OBSERVE CHILDREN’S E-LIT  

AND SUPPORT DIGITAL LITERACY 

 

Eleonora ACERRA, UQAT (Université 
du Québec en Abitibi-Témiscamingue)  

Nathalie LACELLE, UQAM (Université 
du Québec à Montréal)  

 

 

 
 
Introduction 
The children’s and young adults’ digital content market is growing at a fast pace and already 
represents  a  considerable  share  of  the  editorial  field,  both  in  terms  of  downloads  and 
distribution.  As  of  April  2021,  395  000  mobile  apps  labelled  as  suitable  for  children  were 
available in the Apple App Store and 283 000 in the Google Play [Curry, 2021], corresponding 
respectively to 8,6% and 11,2% of the listing volume overall. In Quebec, where nine out of ten 
households are connected to the Internet [CEFRIO, 2017], several public industries, multimedia 
companies,  as  well  as  big  and small  print  publishers  have  realized  important  investments  to 
develop new content and new distribution paths, both adapting their previous catalogues and 
experimenting  innovative  technological  solutions.  For  instance,  Télé-Québec  has  launched  a 
collection of augmented adaptations of print picturebooks intended for primary school pupils. 
Fonfon, a print children’s publisher, has developed a catalogue of mobile apps. La Pastèque, in 
collaboration with La puce à l’oreille, a Quebecois startup specialized  in audio content, has 
recently launched several podcasts, meant to extend the print picturebooks reading experiences. 
This  editorial  effort  was  accompanied  by  an  impressive  augmentation  of  digital  books 
borrowings,  especially  during  the  pandemic.  According  to  the  figures  published  by  the 
pretnumerique.ca platform and the statements of the director of the Quebecois digital library 
Bibliopresto,  Jean-François  Cusson,  in  Québec,  an  impressive  increase  of  children’s  books 
borrowings  was  observed  in  20201  (+176%  in  the  comic  books  section,  +125%  in  the 
picturebooks and novels one, and +185% in non-fictional category) [Levesque, 2020]. 

1 For previous reports, see https://bibliopresto.ca/publications.php  

 

 

1 

At  the  same  time,  educational  policies  have  proven  receptive  to  digital  literacy  issues  and 
sensitive  to  the  importance  of  introducing  digital  and  multimodal  content  in  the  ordinary 
curricula.  In  particular,  the  Digital  Action  Plan  (Plan  d’Action  Numérique),  released  by  the 
Ministry  of  Education  and  Higher  Education  in  2018,  has  stressed  the  importance  of 
systematically including digital content and digital competencies in the 21st century educational 
programs. By insisting on the objectives targeted in the Educational Success Policy (Politique 
de la réussite éducative), that were already aimed at “better integrating the 21st century skills 
and  the  possibilities  of  digital  technology”,  the  Quebecois  Digital  Action  Plan  defines  33 
measures,  intended  to  achieve  “nine  objectives,  referring  to  three  major  orientations,  all 
centered on the needs of educational communities”. The first concerns the modernization of the 
educational  offer,  the  promotion  of  digital  culture  and  the  development  of  digital  skills  and 
competencies among both young people and adults. The second aims at improving the use of 
technology  for  teaching  and  learning,  by  encouraging  innovative  practices,  establishing 
efficient  systems  for  sharing  digital  resources  and  activities,  and  deploying  new  and  varied 
distance  educational  offers,  based  more  on  learners’  needs  and  realities.  Finally,  the  third 
orientation focuses on the educative curricula themselves, on the implementation of digital tools 
to accompany students’ progressions throughout their education and on the development of fair 
and safe conditions to access digital technologies [MEES, 2018]. Within this framework, the 
Digital competency framework (Cadre de référence de la compétence numérique), released as 
the first measure of the Digital Action Plan, has identified twelve dimensions – corresponding 
to as many competencies and skills – that young Quebecers need to master in order “to become 
increasingly  autonomous  in  their  use  of  digital  technologies  in  educational  or  professional 
contexts as well as in everyday life” [MEES, 2019, p.7]. Digital reading skills and competencies 
appear  transversal,  both  at  primary  and  secondary  levels,  and  cover  most  of  the  twelve 
dimensions:  they  are  fundamental  for  developing  and  mobilizing  technological  skills 
(Dimension  2),  collaborating,  communicating  and  producing  content  via  digital  technology 
(Dimensions 5, 6 and 7), developing critical thinking with regard the use of digital technology 
(Dimension  11),  adopting  an  innovative  and  creative  approach  the  use  of  digital  technology 
(Dimension 12)  [MEES, 2019].  
However, despite the sector dynamism and the interest of institutions, teachers and researchers 
towards digital content and digital literacy, children’s e-literature still presents major issues, in 
terms  of  production,  distribution  and  diffusion.  Developers,  publishers  and  educators  admit 
their difficulties and their partial knowledge of the editorial offer, of the creative processes, of 
the reading modes and habits in the digital environments, especially those of young readers. 
Thus, in order to support the digital transformation of the Quebec youth e-publishing sector and 
facilitate  both  the  “discoverability”  [Bisaillon,  2018]  of  its  products  and  their  use  in  school 
context, a team of 10 researchers2 from different disciplinary fields (education, literature and 
art) and 12 partners from the publishing or media fields set out to document the issues, needs 
and realities of the contemporary digital market between 2017 and 2020, as part of the project 
“Support  for  digital  publishing  initiatives  for  young  people  in  Quebec  based  on  favorable 
production, distribution and reception practices” [Lacelle et al., 2017-2020]. More particularly, 
the research had three objectives: 1) identifying and documenting the needs, challenges and 
best practices in the production, distribution and reception of children’s digital literary works; 
2) co-constructing adapted reference  tools to analyze and solve the specific  issues faced by 
publishers and educators in conceiving, diffusing and distributing such works; 3) developing 
an action plan for the development of innovative e-publishing projects. 

 

2  Nathalie  Lacelle,  resp.  (UQAM),  Eleonora  Acerra  (UQAT),  Marie-Christine  Beaudry  (UQAM),  Vincent 
Bouchard-Valentine (UQAM), Jean-François Boutin (UQAR-Lévis), Sylvain Brehm (UQAM), Monique Lebrun 
(UQAM), Virginie Martel (UQAR-Lévis), Moniques Richard (UQAM), Élaine Turgeon (UQAM). 

 

2 

Data was gathered via semi-structured interviews with different actors involved in producing, 
distributing or accompanying the reception of children’s digital literary works. 
A preliminary inquiry with 43 primary and secondary levels teachers was conducted in 2017, 
in order to describe their knowledge of e-literary creations and their effective use. Two cycles 
of interviews were then conducted with 17 print or digital publishers, developers and producers, 
that already had significant  experience in digital  children’s publishing  and wished to further 
exploit the potential of technology for their creations, by identifying and overcoming the issues, 
needs and problems encountered during the creation, production or distribution phases. Their 
statements,  coupled  with  an  inquiry  on  their  needs,  expectations  and  ambitions,  as  well  as 
scientific literature reviews of digital reading and writing practices, led to identify several major 
issues, undermining or slowing their initiatives. In parallel, a close look at their production, at 
the contents available and at the platforms effectively developed in the last five years offered a 
clear portrait of the current orientations of the digital children’s literature publishing field in 
Quebec.  
In this article we present the Lab-yrinhte.ca website and virtual laboratory, which results from 
the previous research and meets its goals, on one side, by depicting the major issues encountered 
by publishers and educators and suggesting recommendations and best practices, and, on the 
other  side,  by  offering  a  detailed  and  up-to-date  catalogue  of  the  current  digital  children’s 
literature offer. After having introduced the context of the website and virtual laboratory, we 
will present its content and intentions in more detail.   
 

1.  Context of the virtual laboratory  

Educators’  and  publishers’  statements  gathered  through  the  interviews  have  revealed  three 
major issues that seem to hinder the production and the distribution of digital literary content 
for young readers, as well as their diffusion in school contexts [Caption 1].  
The first one refers to the lack of knowledge about the  current editorial offer, by educators, 
librarians  and,  more  generally,  by  common  readers.  Genres,  technological  solutions  and 
formats, multimodal combinations, poetic and rhetorical effects of literary creations seem to be 
insufficiently  known.  However,  just  like  educators  and  teachers  [Stockless  and  Villeneuve, 
2017],  publishers  and  authors  feel  insecure  about  their  e-literary  knowledge  and  claim  they 
would need a more in-depth training on the specificities of digital literature, as well as on the 
processes of its production and creation. They equally insist on the importance of improving 
their  collaborations  with  digital  media  actors  and  other  print  publishers,  in  order  to  imbibe 
ideas,  creative  solutions,  literary  and  artistic  tendencies  of  their  contemporary  cultural 
ecosystem. At the same time, as a necessary part of their acculturation, respondents – educators 
and publishers – mention the importance of creating and accessing dedicated spaces to discover 
children’s e-literature initiatives, especially those of independent studios, often drowned by the 
commercial and marketing strategies of bigger competitors. 
The second issue is related to young readers’ specificities and pertains more particularly to the 
psycho-cognitive and affective process involved in digital reading, which largely goes beyond 
publishers’  and  creators’  expertise.  On  several  occasions  during  the  interviews,  respondents 
have  claimed  their  wish  to  know  better  young  readers’  development  needs  and  to  capitalize 
more  effectively  on  the  features  of  the  technological  devices  and  environments  supporting 
learning and teaching activities. Similarly, even when they consider the school context as an 
ideal market for their creations, several respondents admit their difficulty at picturing the class 
realities  and  the  activities  teachers  and  students  may  realize  with  children’s  e-literature. 
Moreover, they find information about classroom equipment hard to access, and thus difficult 
to adjust their content for the devices and the operative systems that are actually available and 
frequently used at school. With such uncertainties about school practices and young readers’ 
competencies,  skills  and  needs,  children’s  e-literary  texts  are  often  standardized  in  terms  of 

 

3 

technological  solutions  and  para-pedagogical  enhancements:  on  one  side,  publishers  and 
authors tend to prefer formats and interfaces that do not dramatically reformulate the print book 
codes  and  formats;  on  the  other  side,  they  overstress  the  educative  orientation  of  their 
productions, by adding more or less standardized tools to support the decoding stage, the literal 
comprehension or the learning of vocabulary.  
The  third  difficulty  emerges  with  slight  differences  between  teachers,  librarians  and  literary 
mediators and refers to the lack of guiding materials to present and analyze digital creations 
with young audiences. More particularly, teachers struggle to include e-literary creations in the 
school canon and mostly restrict their digital reading sessions to the use of digitized adaptations 
of  print  texts  (even  if  their  technological  equipment  would  support  more  interactive  and 
dynamic texts). Again, the unfamiliarity with digital texts, with their poetics and their potential 
didactic usages, seems to represent an obstacle to the implementation of new practices.   
 
 
 

Caption 1. The graphic presents the major issues in production, distribution and reception of children’s e-
literary contents identified through the analysis of publishers’ and educators’ statements. 

 

 

2.  Lab-yrinthe: an online laboratory for educators and publishers 

In order to reduce the limitations observed during this research, to stimulate reading practices 
and to help educators developing young readers’ competencies in digital literacy, a website and 
a virtual laboratory dedicated to children’s digital creation has been conceived, in partnership 
with the Littérature Quebecoise Mobile partnership, directed by Bertrand Gervais: Lab-yrinthe. 
The website, launched in May 2021, is intended as a virtual laboratory on the contemporary 
children’s  digital  literary  phenomena  and  aims  at  providing  information  based  on  scientific 
observations, as well as conceptual and didactic tools for educators, publishers and researchers. 
The website  is thus organized into six sections:  the first section  introduces the team  and the 
mission of the website; the second, addressed to teachers, editors and students, offers detailed 
descriptions  of  e-literary  children’s  works;  the  third,  directed  to  publishers,  presents 
recommendations and advice based both on the research and on literature reviews; the fourth, 
more oriented towards educators and teachers, contains descriptions of theoretical concepts and 

 

4 

notions of digital literature, as well as indications to include digital literature specificities in the 
literature class; the fifth illustrates some of the projects followed during the research; the last, 
containing four sub-sections, compile relevant news (events, book releases, conferences, etc.) 
on digital literature in Quebec.  
 

2.1. A portrait of children’s e-lit  

The  “Digital  works”  section  of  the  Lab-yrinthe  website  presents  a  catalog  of  heterogeneous 
digital literary works produced or distributed in Quebec, including enriched books, mobile apps, 
narrative video games, geolocated narrations, augmented reality creations, interactive theater 
performances, virtual installations and podcasts [Caption 2].  Each creation is analyzed from a 
set of descriptive parameters conceived by the research team [Acerra, Lacelle et al., 2021] with 
the purpose of illustrating the semiotic, multimodal and technological materials of the text, as 
well as the poetic or rhetorical effects of their combinations. Moving from a consideration of 
digital literature as an amalgam of literary and technological components, and methodologically 
choosing  to  identify  elements  that  repeatedly  appear,  regardless  of  the  formal  and  stylistic 
specificities of each textual typology, we took account of three interdependent levels. The first 
one describes the formal structures of children’s literary texts; the second focuses on content 
representation modes, and the third one puts the accent on the types of interactions required for 
the empirical subject. The analysis of the formal structures allowed to classify digital literary 
works according to their genres and the different roles given to their model reader. On one side, 
we  were  able  to  distinguish  creations  displaying  linearity  and  sequentiality  from  others 
presenting non-linear structures, tabular or multiple paths, depending totally, or in part, on the 
readers’ choices. On the other side, the implied postures of the readers led to classify works 
according to the kind of interventions required for young readers, and eventually to distinguish 
creations favouring playful encounter, linear reading, or sound or tactile discovery. Regarding 
the  dimension  of  content  representation  modes,  we  adapted  the  Aarseth  [1997]  model  and 
identified works in which the textual materials remain fixed for the entire time of the reading 
session,  or  evolve  according  to  the  readers’  requests  or  to  (semi)automated  devices’  and 
programs’  orders.  We  therefore  distinguished  creations  allowing  to  reactivate,  replay  and 
relaunch  elements already read, seen, listened  to or played under  the same conditions as the 
first reading, from those suggesting a number of variations from the first execution. By focusing 
more  precisely  on  textual  materials  accessibility,  we  classified  digital  children’s  e-literary 
works according to the conditions allowing the content to display: textual materials could either 
appear  in  a  clear  and  immediate  way,  or  be  blurred,  delayed  and  hindered.  Finally,  by 
considering  the  interactivity  “a  mediated  and  programmed  possibility  of  choice  and  action” 
[Archibald and  Gervais, 2006, p. 31], we identified works in which the readers’ actions and 
gestures  provoke  a  modification  in  the  narrative  scheme,  in  the  computer  code  or  in  the 
representation  of  the  text  itself.  Within  this  category,  we  distinguished  digital  works 
programming compulsory and explicitly required manipulations, from others requiring optional 
and implicit interventions.  
Following this descriptive parameters’ grid, we analyzed each digital work and presented their 
structures and main themes, as well as their user experiences, according to the different devices 
and  their  technologies.  Each  record  was  completed  by  some  educational  and  didactic 
suggestions,  both  based  on  the  works  themes  and  on  their  techno-literary  features.  This 
subsection, directed to teachers, is meant to offer some reading and analysis keys and, at the 
same  time,  to  suggest  clear  examples  of  the  possible  exploitations  of  digital  texts  in  school 
context. 
 

 

5 

Caption 2. An overview of the « Digital works » catalog. 

 

 
Keywords  regarding  the  main  concepts  and  notions  of  digital  literature  mobilized  in  the 
descriptions are linked to the “Education” section, where more detailed theoretical and critical 
information is provided.  
 

2.2. A repertory of educative tools  

The  “Education”  section  of  the  website  is  more  specifically  dedicated  to  introducing,  in  an 
accessible language, a selection of concepts and theories necessary to teach digital literature, 
present  e-literary  genres  and  describe  the  techno-literary  features  to  young  audiences.  Each 
entry  summarizes  theoretical  and  critical  works,  about,  for  instance,  the  multimodality 
framework, the notion of “genre” in e-literary theory, the concepts of lability and obsolescence, 
or  the  opposition  between  linearity  and  non-linearity  [Caption  3].  These  aspects  are  finally 
observed in an educative and didactic perspective, underlining the elements that young readers 
should  be  aware  of,  in  order  to  read,  understand,  interpret  and  appreciate  digital  literary 
creations, their codes and their specificities. Educators are supposed to refer to this section of 
the website to enter the e-literary critiques and to identify the elements necessary to train young 
audiences. Publishers may consult this section to examine other publishing or self-publishing 
choices, and to be eventually reinvested in the development of innovative, relevant and varied 
children’s content. 
 

 

6 

Caption 3. An overview of the contents analyzed in the “Education” section. 

 

 

2.3. Recommendations for publishers   

Resulting  from  seven  research  reports  dedicated  to  analyzing  the  major  issues  that  emerged 
during the data collection (the need, for publishers and creators, to improve their knowledge of: 
digital  cultures;  techn(olog)ical  savoir-faire,  funding  possibilities,  discoverability  paths, 
scientific results, school practices, readers behaviors and habits), the “Publishing” section offers 
recommendations to answer publishers’ concerns. It consists of nine modules, organized in a 
similar tripartite structure. After a recall of five participants’ key quotes [Caption 4], the first 
part  of  each  notice  describes  several  aspects  of  the  topics  that  members  of  our  sample 
considered  problematic  [Caption  5].  The  “Digital  professions”  module,  for  instance,  first 
presents an overview of the issue at hand and explains how the complexification of the creative 
process in the digital environment and, more particularly, the necessary involvement of several 
analogue  and  digital  experts  (authors,  graphic  artists,  developers,  sound  creators,  narrative 
architects,  etc.)  may  represent  a  challenge  for  several  print  publishers.  The  following  four 
subsections respectively analyze the temporal constraints associated with the digital production 
scheduling; the roles of the creative, technical and educative poles ideally involved in the design 
and development processes; their possible interactions; and the missions of the so called “digital 
passeurs” [Lieutier, 2021], who may facilitate the communication between the different creative 
units. Finally, the last part of the module presents five recommendations, which may support 
publishers and creators to overcome their barriers and difficulties.  
 

Caption 4. An example of key quotes presented in the “Publishing” section. 

 

 

7 

Caption 5. An example of the “Observations” concerning the issues emerged during the research.  

 

 

2.4. Partnership projects 

The  fourth  section  of  the  website  is  aimed  at  presenting  the  main  projects,  carried  out  in 
partnership with several actors from the Quebecois cultural industry, ranging from the national 
television,  public  libraries  and  archives  to  independent  picturebook  publishers,  local  poetry 
events  and  bookfairs  promoters.  Each  record  recalls  the  goals  of  the  partner’s  e-publishing 
initiatives and the expectations regarding the collaboration with the research team.  
Moreover, answering to the second main objective of the research (“co-constructing reference 
tools  adapted  to  analyze  and  solve  the  specific  issues  faced  by  publishers  and  educators  in 
conceiving, diffusing and distributing digital works”), this section of the website describes the 
approaches,  actions  and  solutions  effectively  adopted  by  the  responsible  researcher(s)  to 
support the development, the production, the distribution or the mediation with teachers, literary 
mediators or young readers.  In this case, publishers’ and producers’ requests fell within five 
axes of requirements. In this case, publishers’ and producers’ requests fell within five axes of 
support requirements. The first was strictly related to the need of acquiring a proper and secure 
digital culture: partners wanted to know the specificities of children’s digital literature better, 
as well as the economic, technological and temporal constraints implied in digital publishing 
processes. The second axis, partially linked to the previous one, pertains to the need to access 
popularized  scientific  works  in  didactics,  as  well  as  in  digital  and  multimodal  literacy: 
publishers and creators felt necessary to understand teachers’ and programs’ orientations better 
and,  at  the  same  time,  to  distinguish  approximations  and  clichés  about  children  and  screens 
from objective data. The third pole of requests was product-oriented. Several partners asked for 
support  in  conceptualizing  user  experiences,  defining  aims  for  interactive  or  audio  elements 
inscribed in their creations, identifying remediations strategies or even writing some narratives. 
In  this  context,  a  fourth  axis,  more  specifically  focused  on  developing  content  and 
enhancements  for  school  uses,  emerged:  the  research  team  was  therefore  solicited  to  create 
pedagogical resources and content, suggest digital functionalities and study the relevance of 
specific features or elements. Finally, a fifth pole of needs and requests concerned the mediation 

 

8 

dimension:  researchers  were  asked  to  offer  presentations  about  digital  books  to  different 
audiences,  to  conceive  and  organize  innovative  physical  spaces  for  promoting  e-literary 
creations,  and  to  test  the  efficiency  of  some  mediation  strategies  chosen  by  the  different 
partners.  
 
Conclusion. Where we are and where we want to go.  
Lab-yrinthe is the result of an ambitious project and of the will, shared by all the researchers of 
the  Multimodal  media  literacy  (LMM)  research  team,  to  create  a  favorable  ecosystem  to 
observe and support new texts and new practices. The website will be constantly enriched with 
new content, both to update the catalog of digital publications and to follow the evolution of 
the dynamics of production, distribution and reception of children’s e-literature. The results of 
a survey about the pandemic effects on the development processes, on the audience uses, as 
well as on sales and downloads, will be published soon as a module in the “Publishing” section. 
Information on the legal aspects associated with the use of digital content in school context will 
also be added in June 2021, as they seem to be a source of concern for publishers and an area 
of highly uneven – and not always legitimate – practices among teachers. 
Without abandoning its ambitious nature, Lab-yrinthe aspires to become a laboratory of reading 
and writing practices. Eventually, the website will be the showcase for a multidisciplinary team 
of emergent digital artists and developers, and will describe their work, creative processes and 
artistic  choices.  By  cultivating  its  educational  vocation,  it  will  also  continue  to  gather  and 
analyze new school practices, co-creating with teachers, pupils and students new patterns for 
reading and writing. 
 
 
Bibliography  

Aarseth, E.J. (1997). Cybertext. Perspectives on ergodic literature. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins 
University Press.  

Archibald and Gervais, B. (2006). Le récit en jeu. Protée, 34(2-3), 27-39. 

Acerra, E., Lacelle, N., Molina, M. & Vallières, A. (2021). Paramètres descriptifs et figures de 
style des œuvres littéraires numériques pour la jeunesse.  La lettre de l’AIRDF, n° 68. Lille : 
AIRDF. p. 18-22. 

Bisaillon, J.-R. (2018). Qu’est-ce que la découvrabilité ? Site web (LATICCE - Wiki UQAM). 
URL : https://wiki.uqam.ca/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=41074965  

Curry,  D.  (2021).  App  data  report.  App  Store  stats,  downloads,  revenues  and  app  rankings. 
Staines-upon-Thames (London): Business of Apps.  

(2017).  Portrait 

CEFRIO 
https://transformation-numerique.ulaval.ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/netendances-2017-
portrait-numerique-des-foyers-quebecois.pdf  

québécois.  NETendances 

numérique 

des 

foyers 

Lacelle, N. et al. (2017-2020). Soutien au développement de démarches d’édition numérique 
jeunesse  au  Québec  à  partir  de  pratiques  favorables  de  production,  diffusion  et  réception. 
Research project financed by the Fonds de Recherche Société et Culture (Québec). 

Levesque,  F. (2020).  Le prêt de livres numériques  explose. Le devoir, 30 mars 2020. URL : 
https://www.ledevoir.com/culture/576022/coronavirus-le-pret-numerique-explose 

Lieutier,  P.  (à  paraitre).  De  l’album  à  l’écran :  enjeux  de  production  en  livres-applicatifs 
jeunesse au Québec. PhD dissertation.  

Ministère de l’Éducation et de l’Enseignement Supérieur (2018). Plan d’action numérique en 
éducation  et  en  enseignement 
supérieur.  Québec :  Gouvernement  du  Québec. 

 

9 

http://www.education.gouv.qc.ca/fileadmin/site_web/documents/ministere/PAN_Plan_action
_VF.pdf   

Ministère  de  l’Éducation  et  de  l’Enseignement  Supérieur  (2019).  Cadre  de  référence  de  la 
compétence 
Québec. 
http://www.education.gouv.qc.ca/fileadmin/site_web/documents/ministere/Cadre-reference-
competence-num.pdf        

Gouvernement 

du 

numérique. 

Québec : 

Stockless,  A.    &  Villeneuve,  S.  (2017).  Les  compétences  numériques  chez  les  enseignants. 
Doit-on  devenir  un  expert  ?  In  M.  Romero,  B.  Lille  &  A.  Patiño  (dir.).  Usages  créatifs  du 
numérique pour l'apprentissage au XXIe siècle. Québec : PUQ. 

 

10 

