Appropriationist Practices and Processes of De/Subjectivation: Charly.gr, Matías 

Buonfrate and C0d3 P03try in the age of algorithmic governance 

 

 

Fernanda Mugica  
Translator: Danny Fitzgerald 

Introduction 

 
In  the  final  section  of  his  book  (spam)  (2011),  called  “Oldie  Games”,  the 

 

Argentine writer charly.gr, pseudonym of Carlos Gradín, brings together a miscellany of 

short texts ranging from a quote by Deleuze to the comments section of a forum devoted 

to “MIRAMAR EN LOS 90’S”, as well as the words for clapping rhymes along the lines 

of “Patty Cake” or “Miss Suzy”: “Miss Suzie had a steamboat. / The steamboat had a bell. 

/ Miss Suzie went to heaven. / The steamboat went to . . .” In the book’s “Disclaimer”, 

charly.gr makes clear that “Oldie Games”, unlike the rest of the texts, was not generated 

by Google Search: “no particular phrases were looked up, and the search engine wasn’t 

even used in each case” (2011, p. 73). Still, it remains illustrative of the dynamic running 

through the book as a whole: a series of fragments – whether quotes or the author’s own 

annotations – are stripped of their original context and set to play off each other.  

The fragments in “Oldie Games” recall phrases left hanging for others to finish or 

writing  abandoned  mid-sentence,  as  Hemingway  advised,  so  that  tomorrow  we’ll  be 

moved to take up the pen once more. The fragments speak of the desire for a commanding 

god who would do our reading for us, the desire for someone else to pick up our words 

where we left off. Indeed, they present the curious image of Saint Augustin going over 

his  codices  and  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  “only  when  scripture  has  become 

indispensable to the final draft of his life story” will the long struggle with his faith have 

been resolved. Feeling that those passages understand him better than he does himself, 

Augustin “can no longer evoke even a second of his past without his own words weaving 

in verses from the Bible, as if they had been written for him to discover, sooner or later” 

(p. 67). 

The fragments in “Oldie games”, then, present lines that project their own endings 

or are taken up by others in an operation that – we think – tells us something about our 

own  times,  about  our  culture  of  algorithms,  something  about  the  waves  of  language 

constantly rolling in to finish our sentences for us – with barely a click, and often even 

without. I’m thinking of everything that speaks for us, in our name, all those suggested 

phrases that cheerfully save us the trouble of forming our own and substitute instead the 

algorithm’s statistically-informed guess. 

 

Digital Poetry and Algorithmic Control 

The forerunner to (spam) was charly.gr’s “Peronismo (spam)”, from 2010, a visual 

poem that combines music and text. The writer used the freeware Time-Based Text, which 

captures the time taken to write each word and transmits it as additional information, as 

well  as  saving  and  reproducing  every  input  and  deletion.  The  text  itself  redeploys  the 

results  of  a  Google  search  of  the  phrase  “El  Peronismo  es  como…”  [“Peronism  is 

like…”]. It scrolls past quickly, vertiginously so, as is the wont of readers geared to the 

frenetic pace of the web, and matches the rhythm of the music. The piece flashes past in 

six  minutes  and  is  programmed  to  loop back  once  the  cycle  is  complete.  Some  of  the 

results Gradín includes give the authors’ names, but not all. It’s impossible to determine 

to how much of the poem has been shaped by the search algorithm and how much by the 

author’s own criteria. Data processing and the poet’s choices operate simultaneously on 

voices that  are addressable as  text  in the extremely diverse pages Gradín  has  accessed 

automatically. 

In “No poseas un miedo” (2020), Matías Buonfrate uses texts by Donna Haraway 

to generate a visual poem where the words themselves are cut short, to be rounded off by 

someone or something else ("something that never startswilled / thalwaysnev /  wasasllbe 

starting") New words take shape that shake up the familiar morphology of our language 

and yet remain perfectly legible. Like Gradín’s, this poem captures or simulates writing 

in real time, letter by letter. Buonfrate’s starting point is a Markov chain; he takes texts 

as a succession of words, a stochastic process of discrete states where the probability of 

the following state depends exclusively on the one immediately preceding it, rather than 

the sum of  the whole preceding chain. Next, with the transition matrix established, he 

introduces a “starter seed”, a word or a phrase from which the text will grow as a function 

of the probability of its appearance in the text it draws on. That is to say, the “something 

else” let in to complete the lines is Haraway’s text reduced to raw data and subjected to 

statistical  analysis.  The  opening  line  is  left  hanging,  giving  rise  to  chance  –  but  not 

entirely since it depends on the previous state in “a process without memory, where the 

past is irrelevant” (Remirez 2013). Then, according to the author, comes “a great deal of 

manual editing. Back and forth from mouse to program until a distinct tone emerges.” As 

in “Peronismo (spam)”, it’s hard to determine how much in the elaboration of the poem 

comes from the author’s decisions and how much from the combinations thrown up by 

the algorithm. In the words of Leonardo Solaas, what we’re seeing in these instances is 

“a kind of creative collaboration between the artist and the automaton.” 

In “Poner cuerpo en palabras”, the duo cod3 P03try also work with the words of 

others  –  this  time  by  the  Argentine  poet  Francisco  López  Merino  –  and  make  use  of 

Markov chains to form new versions. They then run these versions through Hydra, which 

manipulates  the  words’  visual  texture,  before  generating  sound  samples  using 

TidalCycles, in both cases through live coding, a type of programming that combines the 

use of algorithms with improvisation in real time. The writing process is made visible by 

projecting the code on the screen. The Merino piece was performed on March 9, 2019 as 

part of the exhibition "Brotes II", which took place at the Pasaje Lopez Merino, in the city 

of La Plata, and brought together more than seventy artists. With computers  sitting on 

stacks of old books - surrounded by books -, the artists played back robot-voiced samples 

of the new phrases generated by the Markov algorithm. At the same time, the texts became 

visual material: as well as the code, fragments of the poems appeared on screen bending 

and twisting eccentrically, as if in 3-D, given that the artists were really – and in real time 

– playing with the plasticity of words. 

While the technical aspect of these works is certainly arresting, it could be argued 

that this focus on the materiality of sound and graphics is also common in contemporary 

experimental analogue poetry. Yet these works are grounded in a materiality specific to 

the digital sphere; it’s not just that they work with other people texts but that they do so 

by means of probabilistic algorithms. While these may be more apparent in the works of 

Buonfrate and c0d3 P03try, they are no less remarkable in "Peronism (spam)" given that 

among the multiple readings the poem allows is how Google manoeuvres and manages 

the vast archive of texts available on the web. 

The works under discussion here suggest a different approach to these algorithms 

and make clear that the answer we are looking for is not always  a function of a word’s 

statistical prevalence; that there is a place for the multiple – as in Gradín's poem – as well 

as  for  the  ambivalent  and  the  ambiguous  –  as  in  Buonfrate’s  –  ;  that  some  forgotten 

poems, like those of López Merino, can return to say other things and in other voices. 

And they do so by using those same algorithms, thus affirming that playing otherwise is 

possible  after  all,  that  we  can  jugar  en  contra  (Kozak  2011)  or  counter  the  whole 

apparatus bent on autocompleting our thoughts or presenting itself as the only possible 

answer to our searches. By making algorithms visible, by showing that they are in fact 

working – even when their precise workings elude us –, these works question some of the 

naturalized  behaviours  and  hegemonic  meanings  of  digital  culture.  In  Kozak’s  words, 

making this kind of materiality visible – as ways of being with materiality – invites us to 

question what it means to think of the digital sphere as a culture of “users” (2019a, p. 74). 

How these pieces work with the algorithm’s modes of being and doing is what interests 

me here, and it is what has led me to pose the question regarding subjective processes in 

the age of algorithmic governance. 

My hypothesis is that the productions that make up this corpus facilitate possible 

displacements or lines of flight with respect to standardized modes of de/subjectivation. 

In the general process of virtualization of subjects and their signifying practices (Da Porta, 

Tabachnik  2019),  I  contend  that  these  appropriationist  digital  productions  give  rise  to 

mediated  subjectivities,  halfway  between  the  human  and  the  machine,  mediums 

spectralized by their diversified commerce with technology. In the double movement of 

these practices, which give voice to others and, at the same time, waive their own power 

of  expression,  we  can  read  -  in  addition  to  questioning  notions  of  ownership  and 

authorship - a deviation with respect to digital culture’s hegemonic meanings. That is, an 

operation  of  withdrawal  with  respect  to  the  binary  logics  of  techno-linguistic 

standardization and the segmentation of profiles, which tend to reduce subjectivity to that 

which can be “recorded as data” (Kozak 2019b, p. 12) and, so, can be quantified by the 

probabilistic  algorithms  that  constantly  finish  our  sentences  for  us  and  foreclose  our 

searches. In the poetic works considered here, this subtraction instead opens a space for 

that which has yet to be determined. 

Given the eccentric conception of the literary in these works, with literature placed 

outside  itself,  what  can  be  said  of  the  place  of  the  subjective?  Before  hazarding  any 

possible answers, we must look at some of the characteristics of the hegemonic modes of 

de/subjectivation that have become naturalized.  

 

Algorithmic Governance and Processes of De/Subjectivation 

In 

their 

article 

“Gouvernementalité 

algorithmique 

et 

 
perspectives 

d’émancipation…” (2013), Antoinette Rouvroy and Thomas Berns analyze the ways in 

which  data  collection  and  processing,  and  its  subsequent  use  in  predicting  individual 

behavior, hinder and block any process of subjectivation. According to the authors, this 

data  functions  as  digital  “footprints”  that  we  leave,  often  involuntarily,  since  all  our 

movements are being recorded - data stripped of all context and meaning, which we don’t 

give too much thought to sharing since it’s perfectly nondescript and, after all, remains 

anonymous.  Yet  from  the  automated  processing  of  this  data,  subtle  correlations  and 

statistical  knowledge  emerge  –  free  from  prior hypotheses,  human  intervention or  any 

“subjectivity” whatsoever. Now what “does not fit the average” is no longer excluded, as 

was the case with heyday of statistics; rather, the aim is “to avoid the unpredictable” and 

ensure that all data, no matter how insignificant, has a basis in fact.  

According to Rouvroy & Berns, the apparent individualization of statistics, which 

is really nothing more than a segmentation of profiles based on market segmentations, 

leads to a progressive disappearance of the instances of subjectivation. Whatever capacity 

individuals may have for understanding, will or expression, these qualities no longer play 

into how they are apprehended by power – only their profiles. Algorithmic governance 

does not produce subjectivation; it is indifferent to any human reflexivity since it takes in 

infra-individual data in order to shape supra-individual models of behavior, or profiles, 

without ever appealing to a subject, without ever requiring we account for ourselves or 

what we might become. The moment of reflexivity, critique and recalcitrance necessary 

for  the  formation  of  subjectification  seems  to  become  ever  more  taxing  or  is  just 

postponed (174). In other words, rather than respecting individual  desires, this type of 

governance appears to be based on the automatic detection of certain propensities in order 

to  trigger  actions  as  reflex  responses  to  stimuli.  This  automatic  detection  aims  at 

producing a kind of short-circuit in individual reflexivity that impedes the formulation of 

singular desires. Rouvroy & Berns refer to actions that occur without prior formulation 

of a desire, thus making algorithmic governance “the culmination of a dispersal of the 

spatial, temporal and linguistic conditions of subjectification and individuation, based on 

the objective, operational regulation of possible behaviours from the outset” (176). All 

based  on  “raw  data”,  meaningless  in  itself,  but  which,  when  approached  statistically, 

seeks to accelerate flows and avoid any possible deviation – or subjective reflexive pause 

– between stimuli and reflex responses (177).  

These ideas regarding the obturation of subjective processes echo with works that 

engage probability algorithms on their own terms, that expose their workings or use them 

as tools, skewing them for alternate ends. I am thinking of the Markov chains generated 

in  the  works  of  Buonfrate  and  c0d3  P03try,  with  their  stochastic  processes  where  the 

appearance of a word or a morpheme depends only on the previous state, or on the Google 

search algorithm that is the protagonist in Gradín’s poem. I’m thinking of the sentences 

cut short in "Oldie games", waiting for someone or something to round them off, of all 

the automatic detections and reflex responses that come together in these works. I’m also 

thinking of the fact that here we have a series of digital experiments that, far from the 

romantic  notion  of  creative  genius,  do  not  express  any  subjectivity,  do  not  reflect 

experience, and in no way arise as the manifestation of any authorial interiority. On the 

contrary, the writer cedes control to a process that is, in part, alien to her will, embracing 

chance, based on the set of rules by which the poem unfolds (Solaas: 2018). 

What  can  we  say  about  the  processes  of  subjectivation  in  these  works?  Is  it  a 

question of subjectivities that refuse to make everything about themselves “available” and 

instead  incorporate  the  voices  of  others?  In  this  vein,  Cristina  Rivera  Garza’s  idea  of 

“disappropriation” might be useful since she proposes that, in addition to appropriating 

other people's words, these practices imply dispossessing oneself of any control over one's 

own.  One  might  wonder,  then,  if  the  artists  that  make  up  our  corpus  really  dissociate 

themselves from their words and even their name, or if what is produced merely reassigns 

the figure of the "creative genius" from the writer to the programmer (Goldsmith 2011). 

Faced with subjective hyperproduction, faced with the ways digital processing operates - 

metabolizing,  according  to  Sibilia,  vital  forces  “with  an  unprecedented  voracity, 

relentlessly thrusting new subjectivities on the market” (2005, p. 28) -, do these voices 

simply decide to withdraw? Is that all? While there may be some truth to this at the level 

of the authorial gesture, what is interesting about these practices is how they assume that 

the work of algorithmic governance is not interested in either the subject or individuals. 

While  I’m  aware  that  neither  appropriationism  nor  works  based  on  systems  of 

rules are novelties in the history of art and literature, I believe that the specificity of the 

digital  medium  confers  new  meanings.  These  are  productions  that  cut  and  mix,  that 

combine  and recombine  material  reality,  in  the  context  of  the  current  configuration of 

language  in  semio-capitalism,  that  is,  in  a  context  that  translates  everything  into 

“recombinant information” (Berardi 2018). Questioning  subjectivity  in this  framework 

implies asking oneself, along with Rivera Garza, if this incapacity to produce other than 

on the basis of what already exists cannot also be read as the incapacity to think of oneself 

except as  the emphatically other. When we say  “half-way”  subjectivities,  then,  we are 

referring not only to the dialogue acted out between human and machine, but also to the 

incompleteness inherent to lines left hanging so as to leave room for the words of others, 

so as to let themselves be rounded off by the algorithm’s autocomplete. In this sense, I 

wonder  if  it  is  possible  to  think  in  terms  of  “mixed”  subjectivities,  as  well  as  spectral 

ones, where discrete fragments of the voices of others take the place of one’s own, calling 

it into question. Although works like these have been seen as symptoms  of the artists’ 

inability to grab hold of and give voice to the world around them, I am more concerned 

with their productive nature, insofar as they rework the materials they come across and 

proliferate disparate couplings and correlations 

In her analysis of 1990s Argentine poetry, Tamara Kamenszain speaks of a self 

that seems “about to shed its role as the custodian of experience” and that “lets others 

share in its acontecer, or ongoing” (1). She sees certain poems as clips or as windows, 

where  the  self  is  punctuated  by  the  comings-and-goings  of  shadowy  “others”. 

Kamenszain reads the mark of a disappearance, the self in the form of "what is no longer 

there", because there is no longer a lyrical self to shape an intimist poetical image on the 

page. What particular forms of that absence, of what’s no longer there, can be read in the 

digital poetry we’ve been discussing? Any hypothetical self might well be punctuated by 

these  others,  but  it,  too,  would  be  worked  over  by  an  algorithm,  by  the  possibility  of 

certain combinations of words occurring, or not, according to statistical norms. 

In  the  poems  analyzed  by  Kamenszain,  perceiving  an  absence  remains  a 

possibility;  in  the  poems  that  make  up  our  corpus,  however,  that  space  appears  to  be 

sealed. Where the lyrical self would be, all we find is automated predictions of virtuality, 

laying bare floating signs of linguistic abstraction, not rooted in any subject or subjective 

experience. Statistical manipulation heads off any moment of reflexion, prompting reflex 

responses, calcified in artificial memory, with a rhythm similar – and yet so different - to 

the one that leads us to fill in what’s missing when we listen, for example, to the rhyming 

songs of our childhood, like those recovered by Gradín in "Oldie games". 

 

A Few Questions and Partial Conclusions  

In  times  of  algorithmic  governance,  is  there  a  place  for  emancipated  forms  of 

individuation? Having posed this question, Rouvroy & Berns answer with another: what 

happens when we are linked only to ourselves, when relationality is "no longer 'physically 

inhabited' by otherness"? Under algorithmic governance, every subject is - they affirm - 

in  itself  a  multitude,  but  it  is  multiple  without  alterity,  fragmented  into  a  number  of 

profiles  related  to  its  propensities,  desires,  opportunities  and  risks.  The  works  in  our 

corpus  insist  on  highlighting  the power  that  a  probabilistic  algorithm  can  extract  from 

something as miniscule as a search result or a phrase that  autocompletes itself and, so, 

exert on the kind of relationship we have with the world. A type of relationship that, in 

the  words  of  Rouvroy  &  Berns,  is  not  conducive  to  transindividual  individuation 

processes  –  those  that  amount  to  "neither  I  nor we,  but  designate  the  processes  of  co-

individualization  of  the  'I'  and  'we'  producing  social  reality,  that  is,  associated 

environments  in  which  meanings  form",  in  Simondon's  terms.  On  the  contrary,  they 

foreclose the possibilities of such transindividual individuations, folding the individuation 

processes back onto the subjective monad (185). 

The works in our corpus render probability algorithms visible; highlighting their 

materiality, they work with them from the inside. But, in addition, they put the focus on 

language  itself,  coming  at  the  written  word  from  unexpected,  marginal  and  eccentric 

angles. In Buonfrate, for example, verbs conjugate in several tenses at once or apply to 

more than one subject, depending on one's reading, leading us to stop and go back over 

the words, to engage in a multiple reading as opposed to a sequential one - something a 

machine would be hard-pressed to do. From the subversive use of Markov chains fed with 

Haraway's  texts  comes  a  poem  that  seems  written  to  pre-empt  machine  reading; 

depending  on  the  scansion,  two  tenses,  or  two  subjects,  are  affirmed  simultaneously, 

states before which the binary logic of the machine would have to choose, and lead to an 

error pinging up on screen. In this algorithmically-generated poem, Buonfrate seems to 

argue that the possible is not always contained in the actual, that  there are becomings-

with that give rise to other worlds. 

c0d3  p03try  also  redeploy  phrases  eccentrically,  in  this  case  the  poetry  of 

Francisco López Merino, leading us to look at them afresh. Between  Hydra’s distorted 

visuals and TidalCycles’ dissonant, robotic samples, López Merino's verses speak anew 

and lead us to pause on the various modes of being words take on in the digital medium. 

Remnants of words and proper names and, at the same time, ways of insisting on those 

same  words  and  names.  Remnants,  also,  as  words  of  the  "unruly  dead"  Rivera  Garza 

refers to, which, nevertheless, come to life in live coding, in being there, in the presence 

of bodies, in the putting into evidence of a doing-through-code that implies a real  and 

shared time.  

Using Google searches, Gradín does summon that otherness, that disparity that, 

according  to  Rouvroy  &  Berns,  algorithmic  governance  seeks  to  avoid.  "Peronism 

(spam)" is a text that gives rise to excess, to the multiplicity of voices that a word can 

draw in, making clear that there is no one way for the sentence to end, that there is room 

for the other, for heterogeneity. In this sense, it disrupts standardized meanings and frees 

itself from techno-linguistic automatism by engaging with it. 

Ultimately, these productions make a point of leaving a sentence hanging in order 

to  go  back  over  the  word  itself  instead  of  the  reflex  response  of  instantaneous 

autocomplete, which folds back on itself. They  do so by  maintaining that  "remnant  of 

incompleteness" that, as Kozak asserts, becomes problematic in a programmed world. In 

this way, they withdraw – at least for an instant and from places literature rarely ventures 

– from the naturalized modes of machinic slavery (Guattari 1980) in order to affirm that 

there is room for manoeuvre after all, that, even in this environment, spaces remain for 

becomings-with through the poetic voice. Thus, they find disruptive ways of being with 

machines, and question automation: they produce difference as opposed to the blocking 

mechanism that, through probabilistic algorithms, generates everything that finishes our 

sentences for us - for if all our sentences are set to autocomplete, the desire to give voice 

may not stir again tomorrow. 

How can we find spaces of subjectivation, other ways of being with  machines, 

programs and algorithms? The experiments of Gradín, Buonfrate and c0d3 P03try offer 

a glimpse, perhaps, of a way out, or at least nod towards the pressing need to find one. 

Their technopoetic/technopolitical practices problematize the specificity of the subject by 

highlighting  how  we’re  rewritten  by  the  words  of  others,  while  the  wealth  of 

experimentation insists that other modes of appropriation are possible, that not everything 

can be reduced to a statistical estimate, that poetry and art remain – even today - spaces 

of subjectivation not anchored exclusively in the human; that algorithmic literature, too, 

can bring forth world; that there are different ways of saying, of reading, of listening, and 

of abiding in the middle of a sentence. 

 

Sources  

Buonfrate,  M. 

(2020). 

“No 

poseas 

un  miedo”.  Disponible 

en: 

https://www.instagram.com/tv/CD9dRlCgBx9/?utm_source=ig_web_copy_link 

C0d3  P03try 

(2019). 

“Poner 

el 

cuerpo 

en  palabras”.  Disponible 

en: 

https://rapo.bandcamp.com/album/c0d3-p03try-palacio-l-pez-merino 

 

(no  hay 

registro de las visuales) 

Gradín, C. “Peronismo (spam)” (2010). Disponible en: http://peronismo.atspace.cc/ 

 

References 

 

Berardi, F. (2018). Fenomenología del fin. Sensibilidad y mutación conectiva, traducción 

de Alejandra López Gabrielidis. Buenos Aires, Caja Negra.  

Da Porta, E. & Tabachnik, S. (2019). “Escrituras virtuales y subjetivación. Los nuevos 

escribientes de la red” en Heterotopías Vol II, N° 3, pp. 1-10. 

Garramuño,  F.  (2015).  Mundos  en  común:  ensayos  sobre  la  inespecificidad  del  arte. 

Buenos Aires, Fondo de Cultura Económica. 

Goldsmith, K. (2011). Escritura no-creativa. Gestionando el lenguaje en la era digital, 

traducido por Alan Page. Buenos Aires, Caja Negra. 

Gradín, C. (2011). (spam). Buenos Aires, Ediciones Stanton.  

Guattari, 

F. 

(1980). 

“Présentation 

du 

seminaire”.  Disponible 

en: 

https://web.archive.org/web/20081116053749/https://www.revue-

chimeres.fr/drupal_chimeres/files/801209.pdf 

Kamenszain,  T.  (2007).  La  boca  del  testimonio.  Lo  que  dice  la  poesía.  Buenos  Aires, 

Norma.  

Kaufman, A. (2007). “Imaginarios, lecturas, prácticas”. La biblioteca, núm. 6, pp. 76-83. 

Kozak, C. (2011). “Tecno-poesía experimental y políticas del acontecimiento”. Actas del 

Seminario Internacional Ludión/Paragraphe, pp. 53-63. 

---. (2019a). “Poéticas/Políticas de la materialidad en la poesía digital latinoamericana”. 

Perífrasis. Revista de Literatura, Teoría y Crítica, 20, pp. 71-93. Universidad de 

los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia.  

---.  (2019b).  “Derivas  literarias  digitales:  (des)  encuentros  entre  experimentalismo  y 

flujos culturales masivos”. Heterotopías, Revista del Área de Estudios Críticos del 

Discurso,  pp.  1-24.  Escuela  de  Letras,  Facultad  de  Filosofía  y  Humanidades, 

Universidad Nacional de Córdoba.  

---. (2019). Seguir con el problema. Generar parentesco en el Chthuluceno, traducción 

de Helen Torres. Bilbao, Editorial Consonni. 

Perloff, M. (2010). Unoriginal genius. Chicago, The University of Chicago Press. 

Remírez, F. (2013). “Generación de textos por cadenas de Markov” en Biblumliteraria. 

http://biblumliteraria.blogspot.com/2013/05/generacion-de-textos-por-cadenas-

de.html 

Rivera  Garza,  C.  (2013)  Los  muertos  indóciles.  Necroescrituras  y  desapropiación. 

México: Tusquets.  

Rouvroy,  A.  & Bernss,  T.  (2013).  “Algorithmic  governmentality  and  prospects  of 

emancipation:  Disparateness  as  a  precondition  for 

individuation 

through 

relationships?”. Réseaux, 1(1), 163-196. https://doi.org/10.3917/res.177.0163 

Sibilia, P. (2005). El hombre postorgánico. Cuerpo, subjetividad y tecnologías digitales. 

Buenos Aires, Fondo de Cultura Económica.  

Simondon,  G.  (2009).  La  individuación:  a  la  luz  de  las  nociones  de  forma  y  de 

información, traducción de Pablo Ires. Buenos Aires, La cebra/Cactus. 

Solaas, L. (2018). “Autómatas creadores: los sistemas generativos en el cruce del arte y 

la 

tecnología”. 

Medium. 

Disponible 

en: 

https://medium.com/@solaas/aut%C3%B3matas-creadores-los-sistemas-

generativos-en-el-cruce-del-arte-y-la-tecnolog%C3%ADa-f6d36dc1edd5. 

Striphas, T. (2015). “Algorithmic culture”. European Journal of Cultural Studies, Vol. 

18(4-5), pp. 395-412. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

