   
Ocean as Media Platform for Electronic Literature  
The ocean is a media platform. Recognizing it as such can change how we think of platform, 
media, and meaning. This panel takes an ecocritical approach. We understand the ocean to be 
a primary platform for life on Earth, encompassing 70% of our globe, and also a platform that 
inspires much of our digital life and literature. We take Joellyn Rock and Alison Aune’s 
FISHNETSTOCKINGS” as sinew connecting our diverse our critical methodologies and 
perspectives, as we consider how emerging knowledge from environmental humanities informs  
electronic literature. 
   
 
Melody Jue: "Beyond Blue: Ocean and/as Platform": What might it look like to speculatively 
submerge our ideas about computational platforms in the ocean? How terrestrial is platform 
studies? Drawing from my book Wild Blue Media: Thinking Through Seawater (2020), this talk 
explores the valences of the “platform” in oceanic contexts, considering its media-specific 
meaning alongside others (oil platform, advocacy platform) and the metaphor of the platform as 
a flat, planar surface. I consider the affordances of platforms and oceans through a reading of 
the video game Beyond Blue, by BBC and E-line media, which presents an occasion to consider 
ocean health and resource extraction alongside multiple senses of “platform,” from computation 
to environmental politics.  
 
Mark Marino: “Diving into the code of immersive e-lit.” From immersion in sound and image 
in Char Davies’ Osmose (1995) and Ephémère (1998) to immersion in a downpour of letters in 
Romy Achituv and Camille Utterback’s “Text Rain” (2000) to immersion in a sea of text in 
Stephanie Strickland and Nick Montfort’s “Sea and Spar Between” (2010), artists of electronic 
literature have plunged readers into virtual oceans. This presentation will take a deep dive into 
the Processing code to explore the ways “FISHNETSTOCKINGS” immerses its participants in 
tides of gender, hybridity, and fantasy. 
 
Diana Leong: “Silhouettes and the Sea: Mediating Racial Fetishism”: From Josiah 
Wedgewood’s abolitionist medallion to artist Kara Walker’s cut-paper installations, the silhouette 
has occupied a singular place within the iconography of slavery and its afterlife. This style of 
illustration can be understood as operating within the dynamics of racial fetishism as it attempts 
to resolve tensions between the universal (e.g., racial blackness) and the particular (e.g., black 
bodies). This talk examines how “FISHNETSTOCKINGS” evokes a similar dynamic by staging 
oceanic entanglements between depth (e.g., immersion) and surface (e.g., silhouette) as a 
complement to universal/particular. By mapping these entanglements onto the mermaid’s 
multiple forms of liminality, “FISHNETSTOCKINGS” gestures towards a reading of racial 
fetishism as a form of pleasure predicated on an ambivalent relationship to difference.  
 
Jessica Pressman: “Mermaids in Elit”: explores the role of mermaids in electronic literature, 
past and present, as poetic symbol and formal device. We can read the presence of mermaids 
as portending transformations in literature’s media, signifying change in the materiality of literary 
production and reception. In this talk, I use “FISHNETSTOCKINGS” as exemplary of how 
electronic literature uses mermaids and what we can learn by diving deep into consideration of 
them.  
 

