This is a short paper about my research into the born-digital book Pathfinders. The 
full article with my more detailed methodology and research results is forthcoming.  

 

A Platform's Media Specificity in Context: 
Follow the Pathfinders 

Introduction 
As scholars and artists in electronic literature, we have a soft spot for 'media 

specificity', termed by N. Katherine Hayles to refer to the materiality of literary 

hypertext. Hayles' conception of "media specific analysis" has become a staple in the 

analysis of digital creative artifacts. She posits to "explore the dynamic interaction 

between the artifactual characteristics and the interpretation that materiality 

embodies" (72) in her research on literary hypertexts. But hypertext and other born-

digital modes for narrative are no longer just our research subject, they are also our 

means of communication and publication.  

There have been various born-digital journals and platforms that encourage scholars 

to use multimodal means of academic publication, each with their own media 

specificity. Many will, for example, be familiar with the journal Vectors: Journal of 

Culture and Technology in a Dynamic Vernacular (2005-2013). This journal published 

born-digital scholarship using a myriad of born-digital platforms and forms. 

Additionally, platforms such as Scalar are specifically developed for humanities 

scholars to publish in multimedial formats. Born-digital publication, then, offers 

affordances of multimodality to authors and readers not available in print 

publication. But how does born-digital publication affect the authorship, circulation, 

and readership of the work within the academic environment?  

 

 

My research explores the media-specificity of the, by now canonical, book 

Pathfinders: Documenting the Experience of Early Electronic Literature (2013). In 

Pathfinders, Stuart Moulthrop and Dene Grigar document four classic works of 

electronic literature using a combination of filmed walkthroughs by authors and 

readers (known as Traversals), filmed interviews with authors and readers and 

carefully described and photographed physical materials of the works. The authors go 

to great lengths to ensure a fidelity to the documented works, by using the original 

technology that was available when the works were first published. As such, 

Pathfinders is positioned as a DH practice to "rescue" early works of electronic 

literature from both technological obsolescence and oblivion.  

What I wanted to know is how the platform affordances influenced the production, 

circulation, and readership of the book. And the best way to research Pathfinders, 

was, of course, by hosting some Traversals of my own. On Zoom, I interviewed Dene 

Grigar about the process of creating Pathfinders, and I had three readers of various 

degrees of experience with electronic literature read the work for the first time. 

Rather than an isolation of the media-text itself, my contextual approach allows me 

to reflect on media specificity as implemented within a medial and academic 

network. From my research, I have distilled four recurring themes: platform 

adoption, institutional embedding, technological context, and documentation as a 

research value. In this short paper, I will focus on the general trends in my results 

rather than giving many citations of the Traversals and interviews.  

Platform Adoption 
Pathfinders uses the platform Scalar (developed at the University of Southern 

California), which has various affordances to accommodate multimedial and 

multilinear research and has been specifically built for humanities publications. Both 

in prior research from the perspective of digital pedagogy (Tracy, Tracy and Hoiem, 

Chan and Green) and my reader Traversals show that there is a learning curve to 

working with Scalar. When first encountering the media pages, for example, the 

metadata format confuses the readers. But as they keep reading, the repetition of 

the structure and formatting helps to ground their experience. Additionally, the 

Scalar visualization tools represent the pages and media of the book as a graph, 

which readers found helpful in getting an overview of the contents of the book. The 

wider use of this particular platform, then, allows both authors and readers to 

familiarize themselves with a common structure of research and publication. Just 

because various works are built in Scalar, however, does not mean they all look the 

same. The users can choose which elements to adopt and appropriate to suit their 

needs and ideas. To the Pathfinders authors, creating a "bookish", "scholarly" 

publication through the formatting and content was important to situate the book as 

an academic publication. Pathfinders remediates the print book by including 

subsequently a front page which one could compare with a book cover, then a title 

page, and then a dedication, before arriving at the introduction. Building on the 

potential reader's familiarity with print publications, this inclusion of paratext 

anchors the work as a bookish and scholarly publication. The reader then arrives that 

the introduction, which already includes various hyperlinks to other media and 

external webpages as well an introduction video.  

Using any born-digital platform does, however, raise the question of technological 

obsolesce. Rather than an individual webpage or obscure platform, Scalar was chosen 

for Pathfinders partly due to its relative longevity. Even so, software updates and new 

releases affect the book now and in the future. This also poses an issue to academic 

librarians who want to ensure that their acquisitions remain available to readers. In 

adopting a platform, my librarian reader highlights that in additional to the 

readership affordances, it is important to consider if it is possible to get the 

publication down to its basic file form to ensure the multimodal publication can exist 

after the platform potentially disappears.  

The affordances of the platform then, are essential for practical reasons for authors, 

readers, and librarians. This relates to a larger question of how born-digital 

publications are regarded within the academic environment. 

Institutional Embedding 
In academia, publications are a primary way to get to know other people's work, and 

as such, the institutional embedding is a relevant topic for publications that diverge 

from established print publication formats. The institutional embedding influences 

both how authors choose and approach their medial content as well as how the book 

is circulated and read. The choice of platform as well as the structure and content of 

the book situate Pathfinders within the academic environment. This ranges from the 

choice of creative works to document to how to situate the documentation in 

connection to short essays and a literature list for further reading. Readers, then, 

interpret the work based on prior experiences with both print and born-digital 

publications. One reader, for example, compared Pathfinders to the video essay and 

reflects on the way video essays have gained reputation within academia. This 

immediately leads to a reflection on how to cite multimodal publications, as citation 

has a key social and scholarly function in academia. Another reader brings up that 

Pathfinders contains more information than a print publication would have, but that 

she is afraid people will take it less seriously because it is a website. This tension 

between media experience and perceived scholarly authority is arbitrated by other 

pillars in the institutional environment. Librarians, for example, can play a role in 

recommending born-digital publications to readers by including them in guides and 

exhibitions.  

Academic publications are created in a network of institutions, including libraries, the 

authors' institutions, and funding bodies. The funding, as part of the institutional 

embedding, can influence how work is executed. Here I want to draw attention to its 

effect on accessibility of born-digital publications. Although there were plans to 

include closed captions for Pathfinders' many audiovisual material, there was not 

enough funding to do so. This lack of financial support affects the accessibility to 

Deaf/HOH people, people for whom English is not their first language, as well as 

people who are new to the field and might not pick up on all the terminology and 

names in audio format. Including captions would ultimately improve the academic 

value of a work. Rather than putting this responsibility on individuals, accessibility 

should come from a shared sense of accountability in the network of institutions 

involved.   

Technological Context 
Similar to institutional embedding, born-digital works also exist within a network of 

technological context. Pathfinders inserts many different platforms, such as Vimeo 

and SoundCloud, and readers can cross to relevant external websites using the 

hyperlinks or encounter elements of the work through other channels before 

entering the book. This inevitably leads to differences in interpretations by different 

readers and the explicit inclusion of different platforms highlights and invites this 

practice. The technological ecology, then, extend the book beyond one self-contained 

text. In the opposite direction, parts of the book can also be encountered outside the 

context of the book itself, for example because images show up prominently in 

search engine results. 

Whereas the works documented in Pathfinders were at risk of technological 

obsolescence because they were created for particular, now largely outdated, 

hardware and software, Pathfinders itself is created to work on many devices. So 

much so, that the authors considered that responsiveness of Scalar 2 as a main 

advantage over Scalar 1. Yet keeping a work alive, the main objective of the 

Pathfinders project, also becomes increasingly urgent with layering and embedded 

media from different platforms and accounts, as each of the embedded media may 

become unavailable. The Pathfinders book is, then, best understood through 

Andersen and Pold's concept of the "metainterface", which theorizes the current 

paradigm in which we can no longer speak of one interface but rather a layered 

interface of both visible elements in any webpage and communication between 

devices. The embedded fidelity in the layered interface of Pathfinders creates a new 

type of source for reading electronic literature that provides a rich context for 

historical works utilizing the contemporary characteristics of the metainterface.  

 

Regarding the video Traversals as preservation assumes the videos have a certain 

status as a source. The creative works have been filmed with the original hardware 

and software, but all readers of Pathfinders will see these works on their 

contemporary devices. This fits within the larger conversation in the field of 

electronic literature in which documentation of works becomes a primary source 

when works become unavailable. Of course, despite their "rescue mission", the 

Pathfinders authors do not claim that the creative works can be replaced by the 

Traversals, but rather make parts of the works more accessible and ideally draw more 

people to the original works. Through the variation in media, Pathfinders combines 

the clarity and systemic approach of a database with a cacophony of voices that give 

a mosaic impression of the works. 

Documentation as a Research Value 
Multimodal works can also use their structure to foreground arguments and values. 

Pathfinders uses its multimedia of videos and images to create situational and 

networked documentation. Rather than thinking of documentation as preparatory 

work, this objective to rescue works foregrounds the value of documentation and 

presentation of sources as research in itself. Highlighting the process of 

documentation, the Pathfinders authors intentionally include the technological reality 

of the work by not hiding cables and such from the video recordings. The videos, 

then, are a demonstration of the research process as well. Additionally, many of the 

videos include conversational interviews in which the interviewers and interviewees 

bring up anecdotes of the early electronic literature community. Readers have 

varying responses to these videos, seen as either superfluous or highly relevant to the 

larger contextualization of the works. This spontaneity in the interviews and the 

reader experience in the Traversals show situatedness as integral parts to the 

documentation of creative works. In Pathfinders, foregrounding the documentation 

process as a research value provides potential counternarratives to the history of 

electronic literature by showing what might have been left out in other publications.  

The Traversal practice has also become a pillar of its own beyond the Pathfinders 

book. The Traversal practice combined with interviews has been developed further in 

the born-digital book series Rebooting Electronic Literature: Documenting Pre-Web 

Digital Media, by Dene Grigar et al on Scalar. The practice has also transformed into 

live Traversals during various conferences with an audience present. With the COVID-

19 pandemic, the practice has turned digital, with public Traversals on Zoom in which 

anyone can join in the audience. Overall, the practice now includes characterizing 

social and performative aspects that foreground the documentation process as an 

important research value. 

This documentation approach is picked up by the readers. They refer to Pathfinders 

as "a database" and "a hub". The librarian reader also brings up how this type of 

publication attempts to visualize the basic presumption in many humanities studies 

of the cultural object that functions within a network of relationships. These parallels 

in understanding the Pathfinders project reflect the main value of documentation, 

the storing of a relevant information across various media. 

Concluding remarks 
Publishing academic work on born-digital platforms does not simply (re)produce what 

could have been written on paper. Rather, the media specificity of works influences 

the production, text, and readership. As I have demonstrated, media specificity of 

academic publications is not simply the characteristics of the medium, but rather 

deeply tied to use of platforms, the institutional embedding, the technological 

ecology, and the promotion of research values.  

While media specific analysis has become common place in various studies of 

creative digital artifacts, analysis of born-digital academic publications could enhance 

the understanding of these particular texts as well as contribute to a more intricate 

application of media specificity. Academia in particular has explicit and implicit 

customs of creating cultural capital in producing and circulating knowledge. As 

publication is a primary and principal mode through which scholars get to know each 

other's works and build their field, scrutiny of their medial mode is necessary to 

understand the field.   

References 
Andersen, Christian Ulrik, and Søren Bro Pold. The Metainterface: The Art of 

Platforms, Cities, and Clouds. MIT Press, 2018. 

Chan, Anita, and Harriett E. Green. "Practicing Collaborative Digital Pedagogy to 

Foster Digital Literacies in Humanities Classrooms." Educause Review (2014). 

Grigar, Dene M., and Stuart A. Moulthrop. Pathfinders: Documenting the Experience 

of Early Digital Literature. Nouspace Press, 2015. 

https://scalar.usc.edu/works/pathfinders/index 

Hayles, N. Katherine. "Print is Flat, Code is Deep: The Importance of Media-Specific 

Analysis." Poetics Today 25.1 (2004): 67-90. 

Tracy, Daniel G. "Assessing Digital Humanities Tools: Use of Scalar at a Research 

University." portal: Libraries and the Academy 16.1 (2016): 163-189. 

Tracy, Daniel G., and Elizabeth Massa Hoiem. "Teaching Digital Humanities Tools at a 

Distance: A Librarian-Instructor Partnership Integrating Scalar into a Graduate 

Distance Course." (2017). 

 

 

 

