Platform-based Rules of (Un)Notice 

 

Digital literature and attentional modulation 

 

 

 Inge van de Ven 
Tilburg University 
i.g.m.vdven@tilburguniversity.edu 

William James famously defined attention in terms of focused concentration: an act of zooming in on one 
out of many possible objects. In our current hypermediated moment, such acts of focused attention have 
become more difficult, to the point where we have come to rely on multiple sources of input in order to 
be  able  to  concentrate.  How  to  decide  what  to  attend  to  and  what  to  disregard  becomes  a  pressing 
aesthetic, ethical, and even political issue (if it had not always been).  
 
Traditionally,  literary  studies  have  celebrated  the  close  reading  of  texts  in  a  mode  of  ‘deep’,  focused 
attention, as a core skill. However, a reader, it is impossible to pay equal attention to all details in a text. 
Narrative  texts  are  written  in  a  way  that  helps  us  modulate  our  attention.  Certain  elements  are 
‘foregrounded’, causing heightened attention, and others are ‘backgrounded’, nudging the reader to read 
them in a more superficial manner. In 1987, Peter Rabinowitz compiled what he called the ‘rules of notice’ 
by which the details in a narrative are hierarchically organized in such a way that a reader knows on what 
elements to focus.  
 
A lot has changed since then. In our present attention economy, where we receive texts and images from 
myriad sources and channels on a daily basis,  attentional flexibility and modulation are arguably more 
important than ever. Yet, the rules of notice seem to be missing: reading online, we are not always given 
a clear, hierarchical structure, and no one is telling us when to pay attention and when we can comfortably 
skim. We do not always know beforehand what might turn out to be of importance, and there is a feeling 
of  being  engulfed,  that  there  is  something  that  we  are  missing.  This  is  reflected  in  works  of  digital 
literature. 
 
In this paper, I attend to the different rhythms and attentional modalities of engaging with electronic and 
digital literature. What are the different modes of reading and what is their relationship to different media 
environments and platforms? How do works digital literature both reflect and anticipate different modes 
of  reading  and  attention?  How  does  their  utilization  of  platform  affordances  incite  us  to  modulate 
attention? I show how these works incite us to combine a whole range of attentional stances and foci 
from broad to narrow, vigilant to absorbed to distracted, and deep to hyper (Bennet 2018; Ensslin 2014). 
In  some  cases,  an  absence  of  rules  of  notice,  I  argue,  I  is  part  of  the  procedural  rhetoric  and  overall 
meanings  of  these  works,  which  perform  overly  familiar  experiences  of  being  overwhelmed  and  not 
knowing when and where to focus. In other cases, attention or immersion are guided in innovative ways, 
not by the narrative itself but through media- or platform specific affordances. These works challenge and 
train  our  analytical  and  hermeneutic  abilities  and  ‘cognitive  patience’  (Wolf  2018)  and  ask  for  the 
development of platform literacy. 
 
Attention 
 
It has by now become a commonplace to say that we live in an attention economy. Of course we have 
more texts, information, and forms of entertainment at our disposal today than in earlier historical times. 

Where there was once a scarcity of information, we are dealing with an excess, and a shortage of time, 
cognitive resources, and especially attention. As a principle that originated in marketing, the attention 
economy  describes  how  attention  becomes  currency.  Companies,  media,  and  influencers  enter  into 
competition for capturing and retaining our attention, and we express the value of things in views, clicks, 
likes and shares. Social media have the mechanisms of machine gambling built into their platforms, to 
keep us coming back and checking in. Attention is quantified and commodified in a world saturated with 
media.  
 
Different media forms organize our attention in different ways. Literary studies has traditionally paid a lot 
of  attention  to  close  reading  and  to  textual  characteristics  that  invite  focused  attention,  for  instance 
foregrounding devices. However, since it was always impossible to closely focus on every single word, 
reading has always been about selection and about modulating attention.  In Contemporary Fictions of 
Attention,  Alice  Bennett  argues  that  literary  reading,  far  from  being  a  linear,  immersed,  and  stable 
process, always has a dynamic mixture of attention and distraction built in. Bennett writes of the book as 
a “constantly interrupted object” with mechanisms like  ‘footnotes, cross-references,  indexes, margins, 
chapter  breaks,  subheadings,  page  numbers,  [and]  bookmarks’  that  manage  their  requirements  for 
attention. Reading, according to Bennett, is ‘never undividedly attentive and always somewhat shifting, 
disrupted and unfocused’ (2018, 17).  
 
How does the brain select what to attend to? Theories of attention generally distinguish bottom-up and 
top-down processes, the first referring to our natural attraction to certain salient environmental stimuli 
(say,  we  see  something  shiny)  and  the  latter  to  the  ways  in  which  our  goals  determine  what  we  find 
relevant  to  focus  on  (we’re  browsing  old  pictures  and  looking  for  a  child  in  a  red  dress).  Bottom-up 
attention often occurs without conscious thought, it is part of our survival instinct; top down attention, 
on the other hand, requires effort and concentration (Gallagher 2009). Michael Posner’s (2012) seminal 
theory proposes three attentional stages: first alerting (bottom-up forces make us aware of new aspects 
in our environment), orienting (we integrate them into our conscious state), and executive (we resolve 
conflicts and make decisions about how to attend stimuli). 
 
Reading and discourse processing, it follows, are necessarily selective dynamics that combine bottom-up 
and top-down processes of attention: part of its selection processes guided by reader psychology and part 
guided by the particular manner in which the text is written or the object is  constructed. As far as the 
latter is concerned, for written text, the so called Rhetorical Focussing Principle (Sanford & Emmott 2012) 
holds that the writer causes the reader to pay particular attention to certain elements, and read others in 
a more shallow manner.  
 
In his 1987 book Before Reading, Rabinowitz collected the ‘rules of notice’ by which this priming and this 
hierarchical structuring of details occurs. He distinguishes three general subclasses of rules: of position 
(e.g., titles, beginnings and endings of sections, epigraphs and subtitles), of intratextual disruption, and 
extratextual  deviation.  They  affect,  first,  ‘noticeability’  (where  to  place  our  attention),  and,  second, 
‘scaffolding’ (the notion that our interpretation of the text’s overall meaning should be able to account 
for those elements).  
 
Textual manipulations to guide attentional selection are often described in terms of foregrounding and 
backgrounding techniques. Foregrounding is a term used for unusual or surprising linguistic forms or an 
unusually  high  or  low  density  of  particular  forms,  causing  heightened  or  sharpened  focus  on  those 
elements.  These  stand out  by  disrupting  the  continuity of  the  text  itself,  or  going  against  extratextual 
norms. Foregrounding can occur on all linguistic levels: typographic (including punctuation), phonological, 

lexical/semantic, syntactic, and discursive (see Leech and Short 2007 for a comprehensive inventory of 
examples on all levels).  
 
If  certain  details  draw  our  focus,  it  is  only  natural  that  others  should  be  more  ‘skimmable’  or  even 
‘skippable’ by comparison. We tend to skip words that are highly predictable, repetitions (however, in 
some  cases  these  can  cause  heightened  attention  as  well),  certain  forms  of  seemingly  irrelevant 
information (yet again, this could go both ways), long descriptions (e.g., of landscapes), long dialogues, 
detailed  character  descriptions,  graphic  content,  the  overly  obvious  or  overly  complex,  but  also 
suspenseful  passages.  Whereas  there  is  an  established  body  of  empirical  studies  into  foregrounding, 
strategic  backgrounding  has  received  far  less  attention.  An  example  of  backgrounding,  the  de-
emphasizing of information, is a technique called ‘burying’, where the writer hides a piece of information 
in a subordinate clause. In detective fiction, this is often done in such a way that a clue can be introduced 
and barely decoded by the reader, so that it will only in retrospect be discovered as a clue. In Agatha 
Christie’s  Sparkling  Cyanide  for  instance,  the  character  who  will  turn  out  to  be  the  murderer  is  first 
introduced  in  an  -ing  clause  embedded  in  a  description  of  another  character,  surrounded  by  new 
information (Sanford & Emmott 2012, 92). 
 
As we see, the way in which readers modulate attention is partly prompted by textual characteristics. 
Attention, however, is not a static faculty: our modes of attention, as Walter Benjamin knew, change along 
with  our  environment,  and  with  the  media  we  use.  Whereas  William  James  still  famously  defined 
concentration  in  sharp contrast  to  distraction, today,  as  Kristin  Veel  (2011)  argues,  we  are  so  used  to 
receiving input from multiple channels that we might need distraction precisely in order to concentrate. 
This can be seen in newer forms of texts that do not adhere to the classic ‘rules of notice’ and their pre-
determined hierarchy of details. We can think of art forms that display a ‘database aesthetic’ (Veel 2011) 
as well as monumental novels (Letzler 2017; van de Ven 2019).  
 
In attempts to extract information from cascades of data, artist Hito Steyerl (2016) writes, vision loses its 
importance and is replaced by filtering, decrypting, or pattern recognition. The same can be said about 
acts of reading. When it is no longer humanly possible to determine meaningful patterns in a large body 
of text, an undecidability occurs that has everything to do with the ways in which we are bombarded with 
information in daily life. The reader needs to do the hard cognitive work of sorting out what needs to be 
read and what can be skimmed. There is always the chance that something vital is missed, which makes 
such works typical for our experiences in an information age. 
 
 
E-lit and platform literacy  
 
Scott Rettberg (2019) defines electronic literature as forms and genres of writing that explore the specific 
capabilities of the computer and network, that are procedural and computational, and processed across 
multiple platforms, protocols, and technologies. Platforms are, then, not accidental to their effects and 
our  engagements  with  literature:  they  afford  as  well  as  limit  our  experience.  Platforms  are  designed 
environments that distribute control. They might be monetized, copyrighted, and negotiate forms and 
levels of visibility and privacy (Van Nuenen 2018). Their technological affordances (e.g. their possibilities 
for interaction) in turn shape social affordances, determining what types of sociality and community can 
be  built  on  them.  Attention  to  platforms  broadly  includes  programming  languages  (Marino 2020), the 
integration of  hardware  and  software  (Bogost  &  Montford  2007),  the  ongoing integration of works  in 
databases (Ackermans & van de Ven 2020) as well the appification of e-lit. On the one hand, the ongoing 
platformization of culture and literature means the focus of scholars of e-lit is necessarily broadened to 

take this infrastructure into account when discussing works, on the other, attention to platforms on the 
level of the work itself necessitates ‘platform literacy’. After all, the affordances and constraints of given 
platforms for electronic or digital literature such as Twine or Flash have effects on the modes of attention 
solicited by the works that are created with them.  
 
 
Electronic literature and attentional modulation 
 
How  does  attentional  modulation  work  in  case  of  multimodal,  digital  works  of  literature?  Works  of 
electronic or digital literature have a whole range of devices at their disposal in addition to the narrative 
techniques for foregrounding and backgrounding. They can manipulate attention by way of multimodality, 
multilinearity and maximalism, moving text, deviating typography and sound effects. In order to analyze 
these techniques, what needs to be added to the ‘rules of notice’ for narrative is attention to platform- 
and media specific affordances. The scope of this paper will not allow for a full inventory of such rules, so 
I  will  describe  attentional  modulation  in  relation  to  four  texts  to  convey  a  range  of  devices  and  their 
combination: expanding and contracting ‘stretchtext’, moving, dynamic, or streaming text, RSVP, prompts 
for close reading, and immersive devices.  
 
Pry  (Tender Claws, 2014)  is an app for iOS, and as such has to work with the platform affordances of 
Apple. Apple, which is hybrid in the sense that the company focuses on both products and platforms, has 
strict rules for the aesthetic of their applications and what can and cannot be done on their devices. It 
offers gadgets but also the software that allows people to integrate them into their daily lives, and allows 
for feedback between different apps. Pry asks its readers/viewers to haptically navigate layers and layers 
of  text  that  can  be  scrolled  through  in  all  directions  in  a  formal-material  rendition  of  the  stream  of 
consciousness  monologue.  The  experience  of  textual  excess  here  mimics  the  state  of  mind  of  the 
protagonist, as the creators explain: ‘The whole point of the interface is to capture the sense of being 
overwhelmed. We use this sense of overload and endlessness as a way of mirroring James’ internal state’ 
(Holmes 2014). The text literally expands and contracts, new blocks appear between the lines, and it is 
impossible to read it all in one uninterrupted flow. Pry asks us to read with attention to scale variance, a 
reading that, divergent and explorative, zooms in and out. While scrolling and scanning, my eye could fall 
on a passage that would hand me a key to my scaffolding for an interpretation of the overall meaning of 
the work. For instance, when the text itself seems to thematize its reading in snippets like: ‘something 
about inherited attention span’ and ‘I keep going because in the next line, in the next code, I will find the 
secret’. These sentences drew my eye, as a reader with the theme of attention on her mind, yet for other 
readers  they  will  be  different,  very  much  like  a  textual  equivalent  of  Barthes’  (1981)  ‘punctum’  in 
photography. 
 
Porpentine  Charity  Heartscape’s  With  those  we  love  alive  (2014)  was  made  for  Twine.  Twine  was 
originally designed for branching path narratives, often called Choose your own adventure stories. The 
platform  hypertextual  and  browser-based  rather  than  parser-based,  which  increased  usability  for 
creators, who do not have to work with code. Twine is open source and open access. Functionalities can 
be added using HTML, CSS or JavaScript. A ‘node map view’ offers a visual interface of the work’s structure 
(Rettberg 2019).  As  works  are  published  straight  to the web,  it  connects  easily  to  social  networks.  An 
amateur interactive fiction and hypertext community could be built thanks to these affordances. With 
those we love alive is a dystopia that centers on a character enslaved by a monstrous larval queen. The 
work  consists  of  poetic  fragments  in  a  hypertext  structure  with  choices  that  fan  out,  and  solicits  a 
modulation between close and hyperreading. Both the text and the background change colors, dependent 
on the choices you make. Heartscape makes use of a device called ‘stretch-text’: hyperlinks that make the 

on-screen text expand with new lines or paragraphs emerging between the lines.  Sometimes when you 
choose and click an option, the unstable text jumps to another point on the screen, so that descriptions, 
adjectives or a character’s characteristics change. This textual fluidity inspires a non-linear reading with 
fleeting attention. What makes this electronic text unique, however, is that it wears its rules out notice 
on its sleeve, as it explicitly indicates when it pays off to pay attention and close read. This happens quite 
literally, like when you arrive at a defamiliarizing, poetic description, like  

‘Urchins draw lines in the dust, doing their rituals of luck against starvation and luck against police 
brutality’ 

and  your  choices  are  to  either  ‘watch’  ‘look  away’.  This  takes  you  out  of  your  rhythm  of  reading  and 
navigation, it urges you to slow down, take it in (or actively reject such an experience, understanding this 
entails  an  ethical  and  political  act  as well).  ‘Textual  adventure  games’  typically  emphasize  action.  Yet, 
Porpentine  Charity  Heartscape’s  work  gives  us  choices  that  are  mundane  and  introspective.  You  can 
choose to take a nap (the screen will turn to black) or lie awake, to meditate, to regulate your breathing 
(when you hold your breath the text disappears and the background music stops). The author says in an 
interview about one of her works: ‘The only way to get anywhere ... is to stop consuming and start paying 
attention.’1 The reader must engage in close reading to grasp the meaning of the rich text, yet, as a work 
of interactive fiction that is constantly shifting, it also asks us to hyperread with dispersed attention and 
attune to textual fluidity. These devices together amount to a unique rhythm of reading.  
 
Serial  flash  text  is  based  on  the  cognitive  techniques  of  Rapid  Serial  Visual  Presentation  (RSVP)  that 
measures attention by noting eye blinks. In e-lit, it has famously been used by the collective Young-Hae 
Chang Heavy Industries whose  texts have  been programmed in flash  with sped-up synchronization of 
poetry  to  the  beat  of  jazz.  Adobe  Flash  is  a  multimedia  software  platform  with  a  timeline-based 
development environment (Rettberg 2019). Its dependence on key frames and processing instead of the 
labor- and data-intensive methods of traditional animation deeply transformed how graphic animations 
were produced and distributed (Salter & Murray 2014).  It was a flexible platform that allowed poets who 
with little experience in coding to work with animation and media elements on a relatively straightforward 
interface. There are also constraints for creating works of digital literature: readers are unable to see how 
a work is constructed, because the source files and playable output are separated (Rettberg 2019). 
 
YHCHI’s work refers back to the black and white animations on the original Macintosh screens.  Take the 
example of the six-minute Flash poem ‘Lotus Blossom’ (2002).2 When the music by Kenny Dorham gathers 
speed, the text follows suit. Single words or short phrases are fired at the reader in quick succession in a 
single typeface (usually Monaco) in large font, with jump cuts between words and phrases. The experience 
is  marked  by  a  lack  of  interactivity:  the  text  is  constantly  changing  and  can’t  be  paused,  it  runs 
continuously from beginning to end with a speed that at times renders it illegible. The result is, in Jessica 
Pressman’s words, a ‘visual onslaught of text that produces an affect of difficulty through […] an aesthetic 
of inaccessibility’ (Pressmann 2009, 318). The lack of control you experience as a reader means you can 
only focus on certain words; there is a sense of missing something, but you cannot go back. Deep attention 
is rendered impossible, flash text elicits a dispersed attention, a state of dreamlike distraction. Alterations 
of speed can be a used to draw attention to what we ordinarily filter out, at the thresholds of perception. 
Such works offer us the chance to attend to reality at a different speed, in different rhythms, than we are 
used to; they have a defamiliarizing effect. 
 

                                                           
1 Howling Dogs | Rhizome 
2 https://www.yhchang.com/LOTUS_BLOSSOM_V.html  

Alternatively, immersive reading experiences can be stimulated, as has been done with Lotus, an iPhone 
and iPad by Niels ’t Hooft and Saskia Freeke (with game studio Codeglue and audio studio SonicPicnic). 
Lotus is a novella enhanced with color, sounds, and animation, a Wagnerian ebook of sorts, with Leitmotif 
melodies tied to different characters. It is a meditative app that promises (and delivers) an immersive, 
absorbing reading experience. All elements are designed to shut out possible distractions from outside.  
Minimalist soundscapes of white noise-like sounds, sparse diegetic sound samples (wind and water, street 
sounds,  murmurs,  air  conditioning  noises  in  a  hotel  lobby)  in  your  headphones  help  you  concentrate. 
Together color and audio create a ‘sense scape’. The text is cut up into small chunks, progress is indicated 
by the Lotus symbol, central to the storyline and visible for both reader and characters. It visualizes the 
structure of the story, that is set in different times. Attentional modulation is manipulated in subtle ways: 
the chunks of text differ in length; the less is displayed, the more attention is drawn to what you see, 
which will gain in importance. Some segments are presented line by line, hence emphasized. Tension is 
also enhanced this way. Sudden and dramatic changes of color will also trigger close reading. Thus, text 
design modulates reading tempo, rhythm, and attention. 
 

Conclusion 

Such  works  raise  interesting  questions  about  how  and  if  the  digital  age  equips  the  reader  with  an 
advantage  to  selectively  modulate  various  kinds  of  attention  during  reading.  They  might  even  offer  a 
cognitive training in the allocation and modulation of attention, especially where they test conventional 
reading  practices  with  boredom,  distraction,  and  overload.  Different  interpretive  stances  activate 
different  forms  of  attention:  vigilance,  noticing,  absorption,  a  broad  or  narrow  focus,  single-minded 
fixation,  or  expansive  flexibility,  and  so  on.  Just  as  reading  extended  prose  fiction  in  the  novel  does 
according to Wolf (2018), this might train our faculties for ‘cognitive patience’. 

These are in turn enabled by the platforms which distribute the works, and as such we need a concept of 
platform literacy in platform-based attention economies, to grasp the workings of attentional modulation. 
The scope of this paper does not allow me to develop such an approach, only as a brief sketch of concerns 
and to outline its necessity. So far, platform studies in e-lit have largely focused on platforms’ affordances 
for the side of production and creation, but not so much the reception. The platformization of culture 
raises questions about the future of media literacy. 

 
 
 
Works cited 
 
Ackermans, Hannah, & Inge van de Ven. “Electronic Literature in the Database & The Database in 

Electronic Literature. Towards a Digital-Hermeneutics Approach.” Communications. Media. 
Design 4.4, 2020. 5-18. 

Barthes, Roland. Camera Lucida: Reflections on Photography. Trans. Richard Howard. New York: Hill and 

Wang, 1981. 

Bennett, A. Contemporary Fictions of Attention, Reading and Distraction in the Twenty-First Century. 

Bloomsbury Academic, 2018. Ebook. 

Bogost, Ian, & Nick Montfort. ‘New Media as Material Constraint. An Introduction to Platform Studies.’ 

2007. 

Ensslin, Astrid. Literary Gaming. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2014. 

Gallagher, Winifred. Rapt: Attention and the Focused Life. New York: Penguin, 2009. 
James, W. (1890). The Principles of Psychology, vol. 1. Henry Holt. 
Leech, Michael H., and Short, Geoffrey N. Style in Fiction. A Linguistic Introduction to English Fictional 

Prose. London: Routledge, 2007. 

Letzler, D. (2017). The Cruft of Fiction. Mega-novels and the Science of Paying Attention. University of 

Nebraska Press.  

Marino, Mark. Critical Code Studies. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2020. 
Manovich, Lev. The Language of New Media. Cambridge, MA, and London: The MIT Press, 2001. 
Van Nuenen, Tom. 2018. “Text research on online platforms: Heuristic steps and pitfalls.” In Doing 

Research In and On the Digital. Research Methods Across Fields of Inquiry, edited by Cristina 
Costa and Jenna Condie, 83-101. London: Routledge, 2018. 

Posner, Michael. Attention in a Social World. New York: Oxford UP, 2012. 
Pressman, Jessica. ‘Pacific Rim Digital Modernism: The Electronic Literature of Young-hae Chang Heavy 

Industries’. In: M.A. Gillies, H. Sword & S. Yao (eds.), Pacific Rim Modernisms. Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press, 2009, p. 316-337. 

Rabinowitz, Peter. Before Reading. Narrative Conventions and the Politics of Interpretation. Ohio State 

UP, 1987.  

Rettberg, Scott Electronic Literature. Oxford: Polity Press, 2019. 
Salter, Anastasia, & John Murray. Flash. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2014. 
Sanford, A. J., & Emmott, C. Mind, Brain, and Narrative. Cambridge University Press, 2012. 
Steyerl, Hito. ‘A Sea of Data: Apophenia and Pattern (Mis-)Recognition.’ E-Flux #72, April 2016. Web. 
Van de Ven, Inge. Big Books in Times of Big Data. Leiden University Press, 2019. 
Veel, Kristin. Information Overload and Database Aesthetics. Comparative Critical Studies, 8(2-3), 2011. 

307-19.  

Wolf, Maryanne. Reader, come home: The reading brain in a digital world. HarperCollins, 2018. 

