ELO 2021 

 

 

Theorizing, Teaching and Preserving a Platform-Specific eLit 

TabLit: 

Jason Boyd, Ryerson University 

1 

Tablet computers such as the iPad come with standard technological affordances that other 

computers such as laptops and desktops do not have as a default, such as touch screens, 

gyroscopes, and accelerometers. Their simplicity of design, consisting of a flat screen with no 

required user peripherals (such as a mouse and keyboard), and their manipulability (they can be 

held in one hand, utilized assuming multiple bodily postures, held at different angles and in 

various distances from one’s face, and easily switched between portrait and landscape 

orientations) have opened new creative opportunities for multimedia authors. In doing so, 

‘TabLit’ (or ‘AppLit’) has challenged scholars, teachers and preservationists of eLit to take 

cognizance of the unique features of the platform which has enabled and shaped this body of 

work. This presentation represents a very preliminary foray into delineating and foregrounding 

some of the key issues of TabLit from theoretical, instructional, and preservation and access 

perspectives. It will first describe four tablet-based works of eLit in order to demonstrate the 

creative potential of this technology and its value as an object of scholarly study. These works 

are Erik Loyer’s Strange Rain (2010), Tiger Style’s Spider: The Secret of Bryce Manor (2009), 

Simogo’s DEVICE 6 (2013), and Semyon Polyakonskiy’s Maginary (2020). Second, it will describe 

a pilot tablet lending program the author developed with his university library in order to 

ensure that tablet-based works assigned in a Ryerson University course (“Narrative in a Digital 

Age”) were accessible to students. It will outline some of the challenges this pilot faced, 

including students’ tablet/tabLit literacy and technological obsolescence. This last challenge 

ELO 2021 

2 

offers a germane segue way into the final topic, preservation and access, a key concern for both 

scholars and teachers of tabLit/eLit. 

TabLit as a subgenre of eLit 

 

Although they are computers, tablets are not the same as desktops and laptops. In 

many respects, they are technologically closer to smartphones—indeed they could be described 

as smartphones without the phone (assuming a tablet does not have a SIM card enabling it to 

connect to a cellular network). Smartphones and tablets have a specific operating system, iOS 

or Android, to deal with the hardware specificities of these devices, such as touchscreens, 

gyroscopes, accelerometers, built-in microphones, cameras, and GPS chips. In terms of 

technological design, size, and manipulability, tablets are much closer than other computer 

types to an approximation of the book/book page, and thus it is not surprising that they have 

been used as a medium for eLit. Although some works of TabLit simulate the ‘turnable’ pages of 

the print book or codex (enabling the turning of a page by either dragging or tapping one’s 

finger on a page edge or corner), others radically rethink the idea of ‘the page,’ requiring the 

development of a new poetics of the page. In large part due to the touch screen, two common 

design paradigms can be distinguished in the design of the tabLit page/screen: the indexical or 

digital instrument, which require requires skilled use of a (usually the index) finger (or multiple 

fingers), and the frame and infinite page, where the tablet screen becomes a ‘moveable’ 

viewing window over a page that extends in multiple directions beyond this window. This 

second paradigm can be extended to TabLit that feature digital pages that remain bounded 

within a frame but which undergo transformations prompted by multiple types of reader input 

(using various technical affordances of the tablet). 

ELO 2021 

3 

 

Erik Loyer is well-known in the eLit community for his innovative uses of digital 

technology for creative and critical work, and, unsurprisingly, he was an early explorer of the 

creative possibility of the tablet. His 2010 work, Strange Rain, can be classified as a “textual 

instrument,” defined in the Electronic Literature Collection Volume One as: “A work written and 

coded in such a way that it is capable, by analogy with a musical instrument, of playing 

numerous compositions. The reader is invited to become an expert player of the piece, for skill 

at manipulating it, above and beyond familiarity with how with its interface works, yields 

reading and viewing rewards. A closely related idea is that of the instrumental text, where an 

interface allows manipulations of a particular piece of writing in an interesting way” (“Textual 

Instrument”). As Loyer notes in the App Store description: “Strange Rain turns your iPad, 

iPhone, or iPod touch into a skylight on a rainy day. Raindrops fall and splatter on your screen, 

shifting perspective in 3D as you tilt your device like a handheld camera. Touch the screen and 

guide the path of the raindrops, stepping through the notes of an eerie melody as you go. It’s a 

relaxing, intriguing experience that feels as if you’re holding a living window in your hands.” In 

Strange Rain, the primary challenge is to experiment with various combinations of tapping and 

dragging a range of fingers on/across the screen using various tempos and press durations, 

allowing one to manipulate images, sounds, words, and sentences in various modes (Wordless, 

Whispers, Story). The Story mode has iOS Game Center achievements (19 in total) which 

encourages the user to persist in teasing out the thoughts of the character Alphonse—as he 

stands in rain processing his sister’s involvement in a car crash—through haptic exploring and 

experimentation. A video of the artist himself demonstrating the functionalities of Strange Rain 

can be watched here. As Mark Sample notes in a 2012 talk, we have developed a “camcorder 

ELO 2021 

4 

subjectivity”  as a result of habitually “viewing the world through devices [i.e., smartphones and 

tablets] that have cameras on one end and screens on the other” and Loyer, in an email 

exchange with Sample, noted that “[a]s people began to play the piece, many of them held it up 

over their heads so that ‘it looked like the rain was falling on them from above—many people 

thought that was the intended way to play the piece’” (Sample)—a posture only possible with a 

mobile device like a tablet or smartphone. 

 

A quite different digital instrument from Strange Rain is Tiger Style’s Spider: The Secret 

of Bryce Manor. In this work, the user controls the titular spider, who can crawl on surfaces by 

pressing and dragging a finger on the touch screen, jump between surfaces with a quick finger 

swipe, and spin a web with a tap (to anchor a strand of silk on a surface) and a swipe (to jump 

and attach the other end of the strand to a different surface). This is the core of the gaming 

aspect of Spider, but, as Spider's subtitle suggests, it is also a story (or perhaps more accurately, 

a potential story), told exclusively through images of the Manor's rooms and spaces in which 

the spider moves. This story, increasingly disquieting and moving as it emerges over the course 

of the game, concerns the fortunes and fates of the absent Bryce family, which revolve around 

a hidden family treasure and what appears to be a romantic triangle involving the two Bryce 

sons. A playthrough of Spider can be watched here.  

 

One of the most intriguing aspects of Spider is that this digital touchscreen gameplay is 

completely independent from the story concerning the Bryce family, which might initially 

suggest that it is an irrelevant 'gamification' add-on, potentially diluting the impact of the story. 

To survive, the spider must feed by ‘spinning’ webs to trap a variety of insects that fly into that 

space (the one exception is hornets, which are caught by tackling them in mid-leap—very fun!). 

ELO 2021 

5 

Spinning webs increases the need to feed; conversely, the spider needs to feed to replenish the 

silk it needs to spin webs. Another familiar game element are the statistics provided at the end 

of each level (score, time to completion, bugs eaten, greatest number of bugs caught in one 

web, number of silk threads used, number of webs created, percentage of web coverage of 

room, web with most number of sides), which encourage the user to hone and perfect their 

digital skill as a webspinner. Does all this 'gaminess' devalue the story of Spider? Does playing a 

non-human, indeed a widely feared and reviled insect avatar that doesn't (and indeed, can't) 

care about the story, diminish its meaningfulness for the player? Typically, the presence of 

spider webs on the furnishings of a room evinces a state of abnormality in human life and gives 

rise to foreboding. It is the conjunction of spider web and human domesticated space that 

makes Spider so emotionally compelling: in the Bryce Manor rooms, the player is compelled to 

act 'instinctively' as a spider that does not and cannot care about the humans who moved in 

the spaces which now are inhabited only by insects, that has a complete lack of interest in 

anything but its own survival. That the player, through the spider, digitally enacts this instinct-

driven indifference, progressively authors, room by room, a home whose spiderwebs stand as 

testimony to its being utterly devoid of human life, serves to amplify the poignancy of the story 

rather than diminish it. 

 

Moving to the second tablet design paradigm, the frame and infinite page, Simogo’s 

DEVICE 6, in terms of design, is very bookish, even print-like, in its use of letterpress fonts, 

typography, ornamentation and layout: as you can see in Figure 1, DEVICE 6 draws on 

writing/typographic traditions like shaped text, here with the text visually representing the 

spiral staircase the character Anna climbs. 

ELO 2021 

6 

Figure 1: A portrait-orientation view of a portion of the ‘infinite page’ of a DEVICE 6 chapter. 
Note how the text moves from a horizontal alignment along the bottom to a vertical alignment 
up the spiral. The text actually does spiral as the reader drags their finger down (to move up). 

 

 

Figure 2: A landscape view of a portion of the ‘infinite page’ of a DEVICE 6 chapter. 

 

ELO 2021 

7 

Figures 1 and 2 also show how DEVICE 6 makes use of both portrait and landscape orientations, 

which can be easily switched between because a tablet can be easily and comfortably rotated. 

In each chapter of DEVICE 6, the entire chapter is essentially one page (a sort of text map of the 

environment in which Anna moves) that you see portions of through the ‘window’ of your 

tablet screen, and you move the ‘window’ over portions of that page by dragging your finger on 

the touch screen. The idea of the “infinite page” is based on the concept of the “infinite canvas” 

originated by Scott McCloud, the author of the popular Understanding Comics, and McCloud’s 

concept is predicated on a vision of the computer screen as a window rather than a page, which 

so many tablet ebooks still treat the screen as. What creative benefits does the infinite canvas 

enabled by digital technology make possible? As McCloud notes, creators do not have to let the 

restrictions of the page be the primary determinant, so they could have masses of white space 

or scenery or as many panels as they felt was necessary to effectively convey the story, and 

panels would not be in competition for page space. Creators in print can’t use page space to 

visually convey distance or time because it uses up limited space. McCloud notes that the page 

is an artificial, material division that is not part of the story; what happens on a single page does 

not include the beginning and end of a story or even usually a break in the narrative. As well, 

McCloud notes, the z-axis can be explored for its storytelling potential rather than being just a 

gimmick. 

In the same way that the player of DEVICE 6 and the iPad they are using are 

incorporated into the story (as Player 249 and DEVICE 4, respectively), in Semyon 

Polyakonskiy’s Maginary (2020), the reader and the tablet are explicitly incorporated into the 

story: after typing one’s name in the space provided after “This book belongs to,” the reader is 

ELO 2021 

8 

told at the start of Chapter 1 that the story “began at the very moment that [she/he] turned to 

the next page of the book, which [she/he] had downloaded earlier from the App Store. … 

[Player name] was reading a book, in which [she/he] was one of the main characters.” The book 

starts off, in appearance and functionality, as a very conventional ebook with ‘turnable’ pages 

(a digital simulacra of a codex book) but is quickly transformed by text-altering animations. The 

role of the reader is to assist another character, Michael Sterry of Ipswich, England, who has 

woken up in the book after previously having failed to finish “a strange book called Maginary.” 

To help Michael, the reader has to manipulate many components of their tablet beyond the 

touchscreen: these include the accelerometer, the brightness setting, the microphone, the 

detachable power cable, and the camera. A walkthrough of Maginary is viewable here. 

This brief survey of TabLit is not intended to be definitive or exhaustive of the tablet 

affordances that can be used for creative purposes, but the hope is that these examples offer 

compelling support for the uniqueness and value of tablets as a storytelling technology. 

Teaching TabLit 

For my upper undergraduate course, “Narrative in a Digital Age”, I wanted to be able to teach 

works of TabLit such as those described above. However, I could not presume that students 

would either own or have easy access to a tablet, nor could I require them to purchase a tablet 

for the course. Accordingly, in 2015, a pilot project was created in which 10 iPads were made 

available for short-term loan through the Ryerson University Library for a class of approximately 

90 students. The Library already had a very successful laptop loan program in place, which this 

pilot was modeled after. The pilot used a free app to manage the iPads: Apple Configurator. 

Using this app, identical content and apps were deployed to all 10 iPads. The iPads in this pilot 

ELO 2021 

9 

project were supervised devices. Supervision allowed the Library to configure settings and load 

apps without students being able to remove them, as well as giving the Library control over the 

enabling and disabling of features on the iPad. A dedicated MacBook was used to image the 

iPads. An existing laptop cabinet with a USB Hub was used to connect iPads with the MacBook 

in order to charge them as well as to transfer content and apps from the MacBook to the iPads. 

When an iPad was connected to the hub, the MacBook redeployed the image to the iPad 

including all the needed apps, erasing the apps previously deployed on the device. The pilot 

used the Library’s reserve service model for laptops to lend out iPads. iPads could be loaned for 

2 hours. 

The redeployment using Apple Configurator did not always work perfectly, and 

sometimes one or more apps were not loaded. Sometime students found some of the work 

partially read or played through and were not sure in some instances how to restart or reset 

the app. For privacy and security reasons, the iPads in the pilot had most functions besides the 

TabLit works locked down. This disappointed some students, who wanted to be able to peruse 

the assigned reading, take notes and complete the survey about the reading (on the LMS D2L 

Brightspace) at the same time using the iPad (a multitasking that was possible with the laptop 

loan program). Some students did not like the iPad loan program for the same reason students 

do not like on-reserve print readings: they had to be physically present on campus in the Library 

and had to do the work immediately and on-site (given the loan period).  One of the issues with 

the 2-hour loan period was that it was almost impossible to determine how much time a 

student might need to finish a given work: Strange Rain was open-ended, exploratory, 

sometimes challenging to make progress in; DEVICE 6’s puzzles could sometimes be 

ELO 2021 

10 

intellectually complicated; and Spider required close reading of the features of the rooms and 

time to interpret what those features signified. Other assigned TabLit works not discussed here 

similarly offered a plenitude of storylines or ergodic challenges that some students did not have 

the aptitude or time to satisfactorily address. 

The iPad loan pilot was successful enough that it was continued for two more years 

(2016, 2017). In 2018, “Narrative in a Digital Age” was not offered. In 2019, the loan program 

was revived, but by this time technical obsolescence was starting to become an issue; in part 

because at least one of the TabLit works (Strange Rain) would not work on newer iOS versions, 

we kept using the original iOS version from 2015 rather than updating it. In the most recent 

offering of the course in Winter 2021, most of the TabLit were dropped, with playthrough 

videos of DEVICE 6 and Spider being assigned rather than the works themselves, a less than 

ideal scenario. Given the continual updates of tablet hardware and operating systems, and the 

inability or disinterest of TabLit creators to constantly keep their works compatible with the 

latest technology, whether the iPad loan program is sustainable in the long-term seems 

unlikely. 

Preservation and Access to TabLit 

This last challenge offers a germane segue way into the final topic, preservation and access, 

which is (or should be) a key concern for both scholars and teachers of TabLit. The issue of the 

preservation and access to creative interactive digital work is not a new one, and, given the 

recent demise of Flash, a very present issue; this paper will confine itself to addressing possible 

solutions to making TabLit broadly accessible to a general public, including university 

instructors and students (rather than a solution that is primarily accessible to researchers).  

ELO 2021 

11 

As modern tablets are just over a decade old (originating 2009/2010), there is not as 

robust an emulation culture for iOS/Android as there are for other systems; and while 

emulators exist, they are mostly concerned with getting current versions of iOS/Android to 

work on laptops and desktops. As well, the touch screen functionality, perhaps one of the most 

defining interactive/navigational features of TabLit, cannot be emulated using a mouse and 

keyboard as the means of interaction. Another solution is the recording and online archiving of 

TabLit transversals. One example of this is the website and social media channels of the iOS 

game reviewer, AppUnwrapper (https://www.appunwrapper.com/). Despite being only one 

person, AppUnwrapper has, over the course of a decade (2011-2021) amassed an impressive 

archive of reviews and walkthroughs of primarily iOS games focused on adventure and puzzle 

games (which include games created on other platforms and ported to iOS): her YouTube 

channel has 6,301 videos as of this writing. One of things that I find valuable about 

AppUnwrapper is that her reviews are intelligent and informative and her walkthroughs 

straightforward, with none of the juvenile silliness or ‘hardcore’ arrogance that characterize 

other gamers who record their gameplay and views on games for public consumption: I usually 

recommend her playthroughs of works assigned for “Narrative in a Digital Age.” For 

AppUnwrapper, this work is business, and it’s unknown if she has considered or cares about 

long term preservation of her work. In 2019, due to a misunderstanding, AppUnwrapper’s 

YouTube account (which she uses to host her videos) was suspended and the videos removed, a 

situation which thankfully turned out to be temporary—however, it was a reminder that such 

services are not reliable in terms of ongoing preservation and access. 

ELO 2021 

12 

In an article published in 2019, “We’re losing the history of the App Store,” Eli Hodapp, 

who had been editor-in-chief for a decade of Touch Arcade, a review site for iOS games 

(https://toucharcade.com/), announced he was leaving that post to take up a position at 

GameClub (https://gameclub.io/), a subscription service that enables access to a “library of 

iconic games.” In that article, Hodapp writes: 

With each leap forward, pieces of the App Store's history became lost. Keeping your 

games on the App Store requires regular maintenance - you have to support new screen 

sizes and resolutions, operating system compatibility fixes, processor architecture 

changes, and make other required tweaks as technology advances. Not to mention the 

$99 per year developer fee. 

…[T]o the disappointment of their fans, developers made difficult choices, often 

leaving old titles in a state of disrepair, half-working or broken entirely, until they were 

eventually removed from the App Store. 

The largest purge of iOS games followed the release of iOS 11 [in September 

2017], which no longer supported 32-bit apps. We called this the "appocalypse," and in 

the blink of an eye, an unbelievable number of truly classic, critically acclaimed games 

became unplayable…. As time went on, we realized that TouchArcade had inadvertently 

become the archivists of massive swaths of iOS gaming history. Many of the best games 

ever released on the App Store now only exist in reviews or YouTube videos we 

published. 

These games are effectively lost forever. 

ELO 2021 

13 

GameClub, founded in 2019, ‘preserves’ older mobile games by updating their code so that 

they will run on current tablet/smartphone operating systems. Their catalogue is to date fairly 

modest. The business model is apparently premised on the expectation that there will be 

enough gamers who will be willing to subscribe to its service in order to play older games they 

will otherwise be unable to access (Spider is one of the games they offer). To what extent this 

service’s appeal is not just nostalgic is unclear. The revenue from these subscriptions 

presumably is being used to pay for updating future works and to provide some revenue to the 

original developers. Whether TabLit such as Strange Rain or DEVICE 6 would ever be profitable 

to include in such a service as GameClub is an open question.  

 

How well do scholarly resources such as the Electronic Literature Directory 

(https://directory.eliterature.org/) and the ELMCIP Knowledge Base (https://elmcip.net/) cover 

TabLit? Unfortunately, not very well. The works discussed above that are covered are Loyer’s 

Strange Rain (https://elmcip.net/creative-work/strange-rain) and DEVICE 6 (although this entry 

is mostly empty), both on the ELMCIP Kb. While “tablet” is a searchable classification on ELD, 

only two works are so classified: Lucas Pope’s indie videogame Papers, Please (2013), created 

for Windows/Mac and ported to iOS in 2014, and Teju Cole's Seven Short Stories About Drones, 

a series of tweets published to the author's Twitter feed in 2013. I would consider neither of 

these to be true examples of TabLit. The ELMCIP Kb’s tag for “tablet” returns 9 items, although 

the “iPad” page currently lists 70 items and the “iOS” page 114 items, under “Works developed 

on this platform.” The “Android” page lists 44 items. Without going through the entries for each 

item, it is unclear how many of these works were specifically created on iOS/Android and thus 

ELO 2021 

14 

would be considered trye TabLit. A more careful application of tags would enable easier 

identification of TabLit in these resources.  

 

One suggestion for growing the content related to TabLit and works of eLit in general on 

resources such as ELD and the ELMCIP Kb is to approach it through the teaching of eLit. The 

ELMCIP Kb has a category “syllabus” (https://elmcip.net/category/teaching-resource-

type/syllabus), and it is in a learning context that I find the need for resources like ELMCIP most 

urgently needed. Collaborations between EMLCIP and eLit teachers, say in the form of targeted 

edit-a-thons, would help develop a robust set of learning aids that would hopefully be used 

year after year and that would maintain an audience for these resources. Content like 

AppUnwrapper’s reviews and walkthroughs should be linked to ensure that entries go beyond 

mere summaries of the work and give representations of the work itself. Ultimately, the value 

of resources like ELMCIP depend on the extent to which they can provide or point to access to 

the work itself, and therefore these resources should spend at least equal effort in finding and 

providing access to (and, if possible, preserving) outside non-scholarly resources like 

AppUnwrapper’s work.  

 

 

 

ELO 2021 

15 

Works Cited 

“Android.” ELMCIP Knowledge Base, https://elmcip.net/platformsoftware/android.  
AppUnwrapper. https://www.appunwrapper.com/.  
 
“DEViCE 6.” ELMCIP Knowledge Base, https://elmcip.net/creative-work/device6.  
 
Hodapp, Eli. “We’re Losing the History of the App Store.” Gamesindustry.biz, March 5, 2019, 
https://www.gamesindustry.biz/articles/2019-03-05-were-losing-the-history-of-the-
app-store/2019-03-05-were-losing-the-history-of-the-app-store). 

 
“iOS.”  ELMCIP Knowledge Base, https://elmcip.net/platformsoftware/ios. 
 
“iPad.” ELMCIP Knowledge Base, https://elmcip.net/platformsoftware/ipad.  
 
Loyer, Erik. Strange Rain. App Store Preview, https://apps.apple.com/us/app/strange-

rain/id400446789. 

 
-----. Strange Rain. Opertoon, http://opertoon.com/2010/11/strange-rain-for-ipad-iphone-ipod-

touch/. [includes YouTube preview video]. 

 
McCloud, Scott. “The ‘Infinite Canvas’.” Scottmccloud.com, February 2009, 

http://scottmccloud.com/4-inventions/canvas/.  

 
Polyakonskiy, Semyon. Maginary, 2020, https://www.maginary.app/. 
 
Sample, Mark. “Strange Rain and the Poetics of Motion and Touch.” Samplereality.com, 

February 5, 2012, http://opertoon.com/2010/11/strange-rain-for-ipad-iphone-ipod-
touch/.  

 
Simogo. DEVICE 6. 2013. https://simogo.com/work/device-6/.  
 
“Strange Rain.” ELMCIP Knowledge Base,  https://elmcip.net/creative-work/strange-rain. 
 
“Tablet.” Electronic Literature Directory, https://directory.eliterature.org/mechanisms/tablet.  
 
“Tablet.” ELMCIP Knowledge Base,  https://elmcip.net/category/tags/tablet.  
 
“Textual Instrument.” Electronic Literature Collection, Volume 1: Keywords. 2006, 

https://collection.eliterature.org/1/aux/keywords.html.  

 
Tiger Style Games. Spider: The Secret of Bryce Manor. 2009. 

https://tigerstylegames.com/Spider/tsobm/.  

 

