‘AN INTERNET BARD AT LAST!!!’: The 
Positive and Perverse Power of Alt-Lit 
Poet Steve Roggenbuck 

 

Content warning: This paper discusses instances of and responses to grooming, emotional abuse, 
and sexual violence. 

Introduction 
“In a strict sense, I don't believe there's any definition of poetry that applies to all poets. Different 

poets have different goals. Different poets have different things in their hearts that they’re trying to 

express in different ways that they want to express them. Are my videos where I'm running around 

in the woods talking about YOLO and dogs and dads – are these really poetry? Why call them 

poetry?” (Roggenbuck, “AN INTERNET BARD”)  

 

These are the words of Steve Roggenbuck, a twenty-something self-proclaimed video artist and poet 

who released YouTube videos from 2010 to 2017. Roggenbuck’s video poems comprised clips of his 

stream of consciousness, often filmed while he rolled in the grass or ran through natural scenes, 

screaming. Amongst random – and, frankly, weird –  remarks, Roggenbuck also offered words of 

motivation, urging viewers to appreciate nature and follow their dreams. Many videos have been 

edited to include musical accompaniment, green screen-facilitated backgrounds, and/or additional 

graphics. 

 

Over seven years, Roggenbuck’s fanbase grew larger and more devoted, with Roggenbuck being 

established as one of the alt-lit (alternative literature) movement’s most renowned contributors. In 

October 2018, though, Roggenbuck’s fans turned their backs to him as he confirmed allegations of 

sexual misconduct: allegations that followed numerous others made against alt-lit contributors. 

Roggenbuck makes for an interesting subject of study because he embodies various facets of digital 

culture: visual and aural disjointedness, conscious contempt for grammatical correctness (a poetic 

license, so to speak), premeditated performance of personality, and – as he has confirmed – sexual 

misconduct brought to light in the #MeToo moment. This paper also centers on Roggenbuck 

because focus on a single individual allows for deeper understanding of the particular qualities of alt-

lit – and third generation e-literature (henceforth, 3G e-lit) more generally – that facilitate such 

behavior. An individual example allows us to concretize otherwise abstract arguments. 

 

This paper first introduces readers to Roggenbuck’s work, observing how his poetry fits within the 

category of 3G e-lit. It then considers how the allegations against Roggenbuck may impact 

interpretations of his work. It aims to start a conversation about negotiating cultural value and 

socially unacceptable authorial behavior with new expectations and potential issues for 3G e-lit. To 

use Roggenbuck’s own words (Roggenbuck, “AN INTERNET BARD”): “I am the bard. I am the poet. 

And to be a poet while the Internet exists. Man, we got an opportunity.” The ‘opportunity’ offered 

by the Internet allowed Roggenbuck to rise to fame. It was also his demise.  

 

Although Roggenbuck has engaged with other forms of dissemination, including print and 

podcasting, his YouTube videos are the primary focus of this paper. 

Roggenbuck’s Videos as Third-Generation E-Lit 
Steve Roggenbuck was born in Michigan in 1987. He earned a degree in Creative Writing from 

Central Michigan University, and began an MFA program at Columbia College Chicago, but did not 

complete his studies (Davidson). “I recently decided to drop out of my school because it had no 

purpose for me,” Roggenbuck explains in one of his videos from 2011 (“Nobody Can Stop You”). “I 

was just doing it. People will do things that they don’t need to do. They don’t need to spend time on 

it, but they just do it because that’s what everybody does.” But Roggenbuck did not seem to need an 

MFA to succeed online. Alongside his poetry YouTube channel – featuring 167 videos from 2010 to 

2017, which at the time of writing collectively have nearly two million views – Roggenbuck also 

uploaded videos to another channel that features vlogs, information about his vegan lifestyle, and 

his Plant Liker podcast, which ran in 2016 (“plant liker Channel”). Another podcast hosted by 

Roggenbuck called Read Poetry and Eventually Die ran from 2014 to 2015 (“Read Poetry”). 

Roggenbuck also cofounded Boost House, a poetry publisher and vegan co-op house funded by more 

than $17,000 USD of Kickstarter donations raised in 14 days at the end of 2013 (“Boost House”; 

Boost House). Between 2010 and 2015, he released six books of poetry, most of which are still 

available as free e-books. In addition, Roggenbuck toured across the USA, Canada, Western Europe, 

and Australia, selling t-shirts adorned with snippets of his poetry along the way. 

Roggenbuck is often classified as a catalyst for alt-lit: a movement broadly characterized by online 

self-publication, social media usage, and conscious self-reference to Internet culture. Renowned alt-

lit authors include Elizabeth Ellen, Sheila Heti, and Tao Lin, among others. In a 2014 article for The 

New Yorker, Kenneth Goldsmith heralded Roggenbuck as “one of the bright stars of Alt Lit.” A year 

later, Fan Wu (66) described Roggenbuck as a “heavy-hitter” (and, at the same time, an “Internet 

maniac”). A 2016 review (Holloway) speculates that “[w]hen Alt Lit’s wiki has been finally whittled 

away, his [Roggenbuck’s] will be the one name left.” This same review observes that “Roggenbuck 

embodies, in a way virtually no other Alt Lit wordsmith does, the new sincerity,” and ends by stating 

that “Kate Tempest made me want to be a better poet. Steve Roggenbuck made me want to be a 

better human being.” While excitement for alt-lit has largely waned, the genre is perpetuated in 

various corners of the Web. It is also implicitly manifest in meme culture, notably the subset of the 

‘image macro’: when humorous text, usually in a white blocky typeface, is placed atop a related – or 

perhaps purposely unrelated – image. 

Roggenbuck’s work, and much of alt-lit more generally, sits comfortably in the category of 3G e-lit. 

As Leo Flores explains, 3G e-lit, “starting from around 2005 to the present, uses established 

platforms with massive user bases, such as social media networks, apps, mobile and touchscreen 

devices, and Web API services. This third generation […] accounts for a massive scale of born digital 

work produced by and for contemporary audiences for whom digital media has become 

naturalized.” 3G e-lit meets audiences where they are through references to popular culture and 

remixes of extant content. At the same time, Alex Saum-Pascual suggests critique over continuity, 

noting that 3G e-lit “maintains a hyperawareness of the capitalist commodification and datafication 

of human experience on the Web, but relates to it in a sort of ironic, shoulder-shrug-meh, as it 

oscillates between defiance and conformism.” Other scholars have also argued for a critical political 

economy of ‘amateur’ digital artifacts like video poetry posted to popular platforms (Iribarren). 

Saum-Pascual observes that “purposeful amateurism is read as a critique of those other polished 

techno-imperialist aesthetics that make software invisible […] or that make even hardware invisible[. 

…] Poor remixes, glitchy programs, patchy sites, all serve as a reaction to the cleanliness, lightness 

and invisible pervasiveness of the Web in our lived experience.” 

Much of the praise Roggenbuck received during his popularity climax noted his ability to spark 

interest in poetry amongst teenage and young adult viewers through such oscillation between 

defiance and conformism, as well as through his ‘purposeful amateurism’. In an early video, 

Roggenbuck reflects upon what he considers the problems of modern poetry. “Almost every poetry 

book is eighty pages long,” he laments ( “am i even a poet”). “Almost every poetry book is twelve-

point God-dang font. Black on white. Left-aligned. I’m interested in the more flowing culture. […] Art 

is the making of belief systems. […] How can you have a belief system if all you have is eighty-page, 

black-on-white, twelve-point font, serifs – God help me.” As his videos were posted, Roggenbuck’s 

distinctive poetic style emerged and evolved to reflect this ‘flowing culture’. One video from May 

2011 (“1,000 twitter followers”) begins with motivational clips of Shunryu Suzuki and Gary 

Vaynerchuk, transitions to Roggenbuck listing ridiculous ways to be murdered, and then ends with 

Roggenbuck doing what looks to be a frenetic Napoleon Dynamite-inspired dance. By August 2011, 

Roggenbuck has started filming outside (“How to Live Your Lief”). Within only a few months, he is 

screaming at the camera while outdoors or in public spaces (“Nobody Can Stop You”). By 2012, his 

video style appears to have informed his performance style, and a video of a live poetry reading 

opens with Roggenbuck excitedly declaring that “I am a fucked up prick!” (“Steve Roggenbuck at 

Lollapagazna”) The first video to showcase all of these features is dated 27 December 2011 (“LIEF IS 

BEAUTIFUL”), although numerous preceding videos include various combinations of these features. 

Roggenbuck starts using a green screen at the end of 2016, around the same time he develops his 

fascination with different types of clouds (“DON’T QUIT”).  

Teachers and researchers have observed how digital affordances are changing forms and 

perceptions of poetry in ways that correspond with Roggenbuck’s views  (Padgett and Curwood; 

Stuart). Moreover, many continue to question the Internet’s effects on literary cultures (de Haas; 

Inwood; Murray; Tsaaior). Despite inconsistent conclusions, it is clear that digital technologies are 

changing what it means to be a poet, and what it means to read or – as per Roggenbuck’s evocation 

of poetry’s oral tradition – hear, and even see, a poem. Roggenbuck directly responded to these 

changes through explicit observation of the contemporary literary landscape, as well as deliberate 

experimentation with literary form and video editing software. For Roggenbuck, poetry is not words 

on a page, but the evocation of feelings that promote the interconnectedness of human experience. 

Roggenbuck’s work is rooted in the banality of the everyday, encouraging viewers to consider both 

the beauty and the suffering of their own lives. At the same time, his work embraces the strangeness 

of mental processes and incoherent thoughts so often pushed aside in favor of rationality. 

Roggenbuck is, in these ways, a prime example of a 3G e-lit poet: a mass of diverse cultural 

influence, packaged in a performance that is both bewildering and beautiful. 

Roggenbuck’s aesthetic – including the misspellings in his video titles; videos; and YouTube, Twitter, 

and Tumblr comments and posts – distinguished him not just on the social media platforms he was 

using, but also within the more traditional poetic tradition that he wanted to be part of. In one of 

the few scholarly reviews of Roggenbuck’s work, Prathna Lor (154) argues that: 

Roggenbuck advocates for the reconceptualization of textual production through social 
media as poetic production, and he attempts to infuse poetry into every aspect of digital 
production as a democratizing force. Paradoxically, such attempts nonetheless perpetuate a 
logic of exceptionalism and the cult of celebrity. Roggenbuck’s work thus provides an 
example of digital realism in which social media is used to produce a low poetics that is 
sincere and lifelike and yet ultimately fictive. 

Roggenbuck establishes a powerful persona of relatability. However, as Lor acknowledges, this is 

indeed a persona, a consciously-crafted character. In his article about Roggenbuck, Lor identifies a 

fundamental issue with the tendency towards digital realism: namely, that it is commonly straight, 

white, and male. In Lor’s words (159), “digital realism mobilizes social media poetics as a force of 

democracy, but it also frequently rests on exclusionary logics of white male heterosexism. […] The 

digital realism of Roggenbuck — and of alt-lit more broadly — celebrates expressions of banality, 

boredom, and absurdity by privileged subject positions.” In Literature in the Digital Age, Adam 

Hammond similarly notes the complexity of the celebrity enjoyed by alt-lit writers, writing that “[i]f 

their literary productions are deliberately lazy, flat, and boring, their strategies of self-promotion are 

tireless and ingenious” (144). This calculated use of popular social media “[makes] the social 

dimensions of poetry visible to twenty-first century readers” (McGrath 142). Such use responds to 

the emergence of a new kind of predominately digital audience, which expects access not just to an 

author’s works, but also to glimpses of that author’s personal life and mind. 

And glimpses into Roggenbuck’s mind we get, however dark. Undoubtedly representing efforts to be 

deliberately shocking, many of Roggenbuck’s videos make reference to the illuminati, Satanism, 

murder, or dead children. He may also insert more sexualized clips wherein he mentions kissing, sex, 

penises (his own, or those of others), or some combination thereof. “I will literally kiss this cake into 

your mouth,” he declares in one video (“me and you”). “You fucking dumbass. I got my dick length 

notarized,” he shouts in another (“THE LOST TAPES”). As time progresses, though, Roggenbuck more 

explicitly incorporates issues of social justice, including feminism, into his videos. In a video from 

2014 (“BE YOURSLEF, PART 3”), he recommends bell hooks’ The Will to Change: Men, Masculinity, 

and Love. In another from the same year (Violent J in Roggenbuck, “USE INTERLIBRARY LOAN”), he 

includes a clip of Violent J from musical duo Insane Clown Posse commenting on fellow musician 

Chris Brown: “Fuck Chris Brown. Every time they spin his shit, they’re not spinning somebody else’s 

shit, who didn’t beat up a woman.” These examples illustrate the manifestation of our modern 

zeitgeist of advocacy, the oscillation between defiance and conformism observed by Alex Saum-

Pascual, in works of 3G e-lit. They also illustrate the protean nature of the human mind. Roggenbuck 

is consistently inconsistent in a way that affirms his personal depth to his audience. 

The apparent randomness of Roggenbuck’s videos make his moments of insight even more 

impactful. Amidst of rapid video cuts and frantic remarks, Roggenbuck inserts clips of either 

motivational speakers (e.g. Gary Vaynerchuk and Steve Jobs) or himself inciting critical self-reflection 

and, at times, uninhibited hedonism. In early videos, he touts his idea of ‘boosting’: encouraging 

people to be their best selves through acknowledgement of everyday joy, and by passionately 

following their dreams. In later videos, he speaks to viewers more directly. “Have I convinced you 

that when you breathe it is the most miraculous thing that has ever happened in history?” 

Roggenbuck asks in one video (“life is right now”). “Everybody dies,” he declares in another (“make 

something”). “Make something beautiful before you are dead.” While Roggenbuck’s videos parody 

the chaos and bleakness of modern life, they simultaneously encourage viewers to appreciate the 

simplicity and wonder of grass and trees. 

Interpreting Immoral Authorship 
“Today some really disgusting things have been publicly exposed about past actions of mine. You can 

search ‘Steve Roggenbuck’ on Twitter to find the posts that I am aware of at this time,” Roggenbuck 

wrote in a Twitter post on 3 October 2018 (“I’m sorry”). “Many people will now look back on my 

‘feminism’ as if it has been a stunt or a front, meant to decieve [sic] people. It was not a stunt. It has 

been a sincere effort made by a flawed person.” The tweets to which Roggenbuck refers included 

screenshotted messages from 2011. In the messages, Roggenbuck asks a then 16-year-old Ashley 

Olson if she would be interested in being his sex slave, with Roggenbuck proposing forceful sex acts 

(christlover2000). A feature in The Daily Beast details other similar accusations against Roggenbuck, 

exposing Roggenbuck’s repeated abuse of his celebrity status to exploit young women and trans 

people (Zimmerman). 

Other alt-lit contributors have likewise faced claims of sexual misconduct. For example, in 2014 the 

editor of the now-defunct Pop Serial alt-lit magazine Stephen Tully Dierks was accused of sexual 

abuse (Jones). Soon after, Tao Lin was publicly accused of statutory rape and emotional abuse 

(Tsjeng). Roggenbuck took to his Tumblr blog to respond to the claims against his peers, 

commending victims for sharing their stories, as well as writing extensively about sexual consent. 

The final item on his list of consent tips is “BE AWARE OF POWER IMBALANCES” (“content warning”). 

Roggenbuck’s blog post about consent followed from numerous others exploring gendered lives and 

issues related to feminist theory and practice (for example, “[untitled post]”). Despite his public 

promotion of consent, Roggenbuck himself appeared to struggle with the concept. Of course, 

Roggenbuck may have now had time to reflect upon his past behaviors, and may have worked 

towards making more mindful decisions going forwards. What matters, though, is that his publicly-

available works were produced in a context tainted by abuse, however unintentional or 

unrecognized. Even if he has made efforts to change his behaviors, as per his own admission, the 

durability of digital documentation makes it so that an analysis of Roggenbuck’s work is incomplete 

without recognition of his being a ‘flawed person’. Roggenbuck is not bound to the reported 

instances, but his poems’ contexts of creation matter because they inform our judgements of their 

beauty and our understandings of Roggenbuck’s authorial intentionality. 

Steve Roggenbuck’s poetry was once important for its content, for its exemplification of a new 

generation of e-literature. Now, Steve Roggenbuck’s poetry is also important for another reason. It is 

important because it serves as a starting point for a discussion about issues related to the 

development, dissemination, and consumption of digital artifacts: issues that will undoubtedly 

inform the production and reception of 3G e-lit. It exemplifies the potential darkness of digital 

connectivity, and of the use of the Web for new forms of interpersonal control. Alt-lit, as a digital-

born literary form, was – and perhaps still is – a particularly well-paved path to such control. As 

Ashley Olson observed in an interview about how alt-lit may serve as a tool for underage grooming 

(Iskander, Olson, and Karsavin): 

Alt Lit grooms because it is something on a surface level that youth could relate to, media 
that appears at first glance to be tailored for them. Alt Lit mimics a teenaged affect, 
establishes a more infantile or youthful voice to use as a vehicle for sometimes very violent 
or disturbing ideas, and presents these ideas alongside ones that are relatable to 
adolescents with total indifference. 

The voice of Alt Lit is also established through its technical convention. As in the case with 
Roggenbuck and others, there are abundant grammatical errors, “creative misspellings,” 
emojis, webspeak, text that is literally copied and pasted from social media, in the attempt 
to convey familiarity and intimacy through a relatable, confessional mode. Readers can 
mistake the lack of structure and unrelenting oversharing in Alt Lit for vulnerability, 
authenticity, familiarity, and sincerity. This voice was integral to the public persona as well; 
when I was minor whom Steve solicited for sex, he never dropped the childish affect – it was 
utilized to mask or soften the violence of his behavior. 

Flores’ formative article about 3G e-lit repeatedly stresses the accessibility of this new category. “If 

you count image macro memes as a kind of electronic literature, as I do, then the numbers of works 

produced and circulated are in the millions,” Flores writes. “The number of practitioners is equally 

enormous, numbering in the thousands, millions if you count image macro meme makers.” Flores’ 

article does not, however, recognize the social inequalities already rampant online. Certainly, 3G e-lit 

has the potential to engage a more a wide-ranging and diverse audience than its categorical 

predecessors. However, we cannot ignore the fact that certain voices are amplified online, while 

others are marginalized (Robinson et al.). We also cannot ignore the significance of familiarity 

established through remixing and popular culture references in 3G e-lit that appears in our 

personalized newsfeeds. We literally welcome 3G e-lit practitioners into our homes when we 

consume their content in domestic spaces. These practitioners exploit the sense of closeness that 

comes with familiar language and personalized consumption experiences for affective impact. This 

impact may very well be harmful, as was so in Roggenbuck’s case.  

For this paper, I have applied a ‘critical reading’ approach to Roggenbuck’s work. I have watched 

every one of Roggenbuck’s videos, and have read most of his published works, for a deep 

understanding of his literary style and cultural contributions. Other scholars, however, have taken 

‘critical not-reading’ approaches to problematic authors. In her explanation for “Not Reading DFW 

[David Foster Wallace]” in light of Wallace’s blatant misogyny in both his published works and 

personal life, Amy Hungerford (163) writes that “[i]n placing my reasons, and the evidence on which 

I base them, on the table, in suggesting the kinds of reasons it might be legitimate to consider as we 

make our best guesses about how to parcel out our reading hours, I hope to draw attention to the 

fact that refusal can be an intentional and transparent part of professional life for the scholar.” 

Hungerford’s choice to not read Wallace is rooted in a decision to dismiss valorization of 

misogynistic views perpetuated by his work and discussions about it. As Hungerford asks (155-156): 

What do people want novels to do for them? What kinds of thought and meaning do literary 
works make available? What stories matter to a given culture at a given moment in history 
and what do they tell us about that culture? Wallace’s works surely suggest some answers to 
these sorts of questions. 

[…] 

But with a contemporary work, a work that is still in the process of being integrated into the 
culture, the scholar finds herself in a different position. What if we just stop talking about 
such a work before it matters that much to the culture at large? Stop reading it, stop 
teaching it, stop studying it? What if we start suggesting something else to read instead? 

Instead of giving culturally problematic works and authors lip service, Hungerford adopts an 

approach that emphasizes alternatives. There is, after all, so much to read, and so little time. Why 

focus on that which was produced by the unsavory? 

Hungerford’s argument is well-articulated and convincing, and provides a basis for future 

justifications of readerly refusal. My opposing approach, though, is driven by an answer to 

Hungerford’s question about “[w]hat stories matter to a given culture at a given moment in history.” 

It is not so much Roggenbuck’s work that is most important here, but what Roggenbuck represents 

in a time of transition towards an upsurge of digitally-produced literature and Web-induced 

connectivity. Roggenbuck’s public activity reflects many stories that matter in our culture, right now: 

stories about human-computer collaboration for artistic output, means of interpersonal 

communication, societal perceptions of consent, and questions of power dynamics in both digital 

and embodied space. Engaging with the corpus of Roggenbuck’s work permits nuanced 

comprehension of how such cultural stories may influence or be influenced by this work. Not talking 

about such stories, or deflecting discussions with recommendations for alternatives, does not make 

them go away. The path towards change is paved with painful and awkward cobblestones that we 

must traverse to reach a more equitable destination. This is a destination that 3G e-lit practitioners 

and scholars should strive towards reaching, whichever road is taken. 

Conclusion 
This paper represents my own efforts to determine the cultural value of alt-lit poet Steve 

Roggenbuck’s work following verified accusations of sexual misconduct made against him. It also 

serves as an appeal for further conversations about hermeneutic processes associated with 3G e-lit 

in particular: works appearing on widely-accessible platforms, often responding to contentious 

contemporary issues. While works of 3G e-lit may have extraordinary positive effective and affective 

impact, scholars must be attuned to the potentially negative social implications of 3G e-lit practice. 

Whose voices are heard? Whose are not? How and why? What power imbalances might 3G e-lit 

perpetuate or create? 

Although Roggenbuck was by no means the only person forwarding the alt-lit movement in its 

prime, he was one of the most renowned, establishing a widespread and dedicated fanbase by 

personally responding to fans’ comments in an eccentric and endearing way. The character he 

cultivated, to cite Prathna Lor (154), provided “an example of digital realism in which social media is 

used to produce a low poetics that is sincere and lifelike and yet ultimately fictive.” While 

Roggenbuck’s online character was promoting inclusive and feminist practices of consent, though, 

Roggenbuck himself seemingly struggled to do the same. 

Roggenbuck was, to use his own words, an Internet bard, seizing digital opportunities for poetry 

production and dissemination. “And to be a poet while the Internet exists,” he contemplates 

(Roggenbuck, “AN INTERNET BARD”). “Man, we got an opportunity.” Unfortunately, Roggenbuck 

also seized inappropriate opportunities arising from his Internet celebrity. His choice to exercise his 

power in this way concluded his saga of Internet fame. This saga serves as a stark reminder of our 

responsibility as 3G e-lit scholars and practitioners to remain diligent in maintaining inclusive and 

safe literary communities for all. 

 

 

Works Cited 
 
“Boost House.” Kickstarter, https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1459492663/boost-house. 

Accessed 27 November 2019. 

 
Boost House [via the Internet Archive], 

https://web.archive.org/web/20160504123600/http://www.boost-house.com. Accessed 27 
November 2019. 

 
christlover2000 [Ashley Olson]. “When I was a teenager…” Twitter, 2 October 2018, 

https://twitter.com/christlover2000/status/1047206333852708864. Accessed 25 November 
2019. 

 
Davidson, Laura, “Profile: Steve Roggenbuck.” Rhizome, 25 October 2013, 

https://rhizome.org/editorial/2013/oct/25/artist-profile-steve-roggenbuck. Accessed 27 
November 2019. 

 
de Haas, Ricarda. “Video Poetry as Re-Creation and Remediation of Oral Performance in the Work of 

Kgafela oa Magogodi and Chirikure Chirkure.” Africa Today, vol. 64, no. 4, 2018, pp. 74-90. 

 
Flores, Leonardo. “Third Generation Electronic Literature.” electronic book review, 7 April 2019, 

https://doi.org/10.7273/axyj-3574. Accessed 30 March 2021. 

 
Goldsmith, Kenneth. “If Walt Whitman Vlogged.” The New Yorker, 7 May 2014, 

https://www.newyorker.com/books/page-turner/if-walt-whitman-vlogged. Accessed 25 
November 2019. 

 
Hammond, Adam. Literature in the Digital Age: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press, 2016. 
 
Holloway, Dan. “Make Something Beautiful Before You Are Dead by Steve Roggenbuck.” Sabotage 

Reviews, 28 March 2016, http://sabotagereviews.com/2016/03/28/make-something-
beautiful-before-you-are-dead-by-steve-roggenbuck. Accessed 25 November 2019. 

 
Hungerford, Amy. “On Not Reading DFW”, in Making Literature Now. Stanford University Press, 

2016, pp. 141-167. 

 
Inwood, Heather. “Poetry for the People?: Modern Chinese Poetry in the Age of the Internet.” 

Chinese Literature Today, vol. 5, no. 1, 2015, pp.  44-54. 

 
Iribarren, Teresa. “Subaltern mediators in the digital landscape.” Target, vol. 29, no. 2, 2017, pp. 

319-338. 

 

Iskander, Maria, Ashley Olson, and Alex Karsavin. “Grooming Style: A conversation on how the Alt Lit 

scene’s documentation of sexual violence became a style of supposed sincerity.” The New 
Inquiry, 19 March 2019, https://thenewinquiry.com/grooming-style. Accessed 29 November 
2019. 

 
Jones, Allie. “Hip Alt-Lit Editor Quits Public Writing Career After Rape Accusations.” Gawker, 30 

September 2014, https://gawker.com/hip-alt-lit-editor-quits-public-writing-career-after-ra-
1640785729. Accessed 27 November 2019. 

 
Lor, Prathna. “Everybody’s Poetry.” Minnesota Review, vol. 85, 2015, pp. 153-161.. 
 
McGrath, Jim. “Borrowed country: digital media, remediation, and North American poetry in the 

twenty-first century.” Unpublished doctoral thesis. Northeastern University, 2015. 

 
Murray, Simone. “10 Myths About Digital Literary Culture.” Post45, 8 April 2020, 

https://post45.org/2020/04/10-myths-about-digital-literary-culture. Accessed 26 April 2021. 

 
Padgett, Elizabeth R. and Jen Scott Curwood. “A Figment of Their Imagination: Adolescent Poetic 
Literacy in an Online Affinity Space.” Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, vol. 59, no. 4, 
2016, pp. 397-407. 

 
Robinson, Laura, Jeremy Schulz, Grant Blank, et al. “Digital inequalities 2.0: Legacy inequalities in the 

information age.” First Monday, vol. 25, no. 7, https://doi.org/10.5210/fm.v25i7.10842. 

 
Roggenbuck, Steve. “[untitled post].” lief+, 8 July 2014, 

https://plus.livemylief.com/post/91189167869. Accessed 27 November 2019. 

 
---. “1,000 twitter followers: a celebratory motivational/dance video (2011).” YouTube, 12 May 2011, 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3GkeOkNkTzQ. Accessed 28 November 2019. 

 
---. “am i even a poet anymore? (2011).” YouTube, 17 May 2011, 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bGyloBitGjc. Accessed 28 November 2019. 

 
---. “‘AN INTERNET BARD AT LAST!!!’ (2013) ARS POETICA.” YouTube, 14 July 2013, 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YchvRnKwCbc. Accessed 6 November 2019. 

 
---. “BE YOURSLEF, PART 3: PROTECT YOUR LOVE OF YOUR WORK (2014).” YouTube, 5 July 2014, 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_OVU-w197ec. Accessed 2 December 2019. 

 
---. “content warning: rape / sexual assault.” live my lief, 1 October 2014, 

https://livemylief.com/post/98945605210/content-warning-rape-sexual-assault. Accessed 
27 November 2019. 

 
---. “DON’T QUIT (2016).” YouTube, 19 December 2016, 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=553FUlDf0n8. Accessed 5 December 2019. 

 
---. “How to Live Your Lief (2011).” YouTube, 16 August 2011, 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=teL6I-Vv55U. Accessed 28 November 2019. 

 
---. “I’m sorry.” Twitter, 3 October 2018, 

https://twitter.com/steveroggenbuck/status/1047312208567394304. Accessed 25 
November 2019. 

 
---. “LIEF IS BEAUTFUL (2011) TRULEY WATCH THIS VIDEO IT CAN CHANGE YOU"RE LIFE!!.” YouTube, 

27 December 2011, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fqs33YArkD4. Accessed 28 
November 2019. 

 

---. “life is right now (2015) THIS IS A SPECIAL VIDEO PLEASE VIEW THIS WITH A PLANT OR ANIMALS.” 
YouTube, 10 December 2015, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ENZ2zRB-0AI. Accessed 5 
December 2019. 

 
---. “make something beautiful before you are dead (2012).” YouTube, 13 April 2012, 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0bR6uOsDn-Q. Accessed 5 December 2019. 

 
---. “me and you because i like you (2012).” YouTube, 24 August 2012, 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RtQz77MKU0w. Accessed 29 November 2019. 

 
---. “Nobody Can Stop You From Achieving Your Dreams (2011).” YouTube, 22 November 2011, 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C50fBAowZOA. Accessed 27 November 2019. 

 
---. “THE LOST TAPES OF LIVE MY LIEF - VOL. 4 (2013).” YouTube, 25 January 2013, 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wCwkpyyGabY. Accessed 2 December 2019. 

 
---. “plant liker Channel.” YouTube, https://www.youtube.com/user/veganfrickwad. Accessed 27 

November 2019. 

 
---. “Read Poetry and Eventually Die.” YouTube, https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC_Q_MLFg-

pfnheoR4EA1kYw. Accessed 27 November 2019.  

 
---. “Steve Roggenbuck at Lollapaganza (2012) MOST SHOCKING ORAL POETRY SINCE HOMER.” 

YouTube, 7 June 2012, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-NV1sm3dVME. Accessed 29 
November 2019. 

 
---. “USE INTERLIBRARY LOAN TO KILL GUY FIERI (2014).” YouTube, 14 July 2014, 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KrbFg0TddL0. Accessed 2 December 2019. 

 
Saum-Pascual, Alex. “Is Third Generation Literature Postweb Literature? And Why Should We Care?” 
electronic book review, 3 May 2020, https://doi.org/10.7273/60pg-1574. Accessed 30 March 
2021. 

 
Stuart, Denise H. “Cin(E)-Poetry: Engaging the Digital Generation in 21st-Century Response.” Voices 

from the Middle, vol. 17, no. 3, 2010, pp. 27-35. 

 
Tsaaior, James Tar. “New Wine, Old Wineskins: Authorship and Digitalizing Nigerian Oral Poetry 

through New Media Technologies.” Journal of Asian and African Studies, vol. 48, no. 1, 2012, 
pp. 97-113. 

 
Tsjeng, Zing. “Tao Lin accused of statutory rape and emotional abuse.” Dazed, 2 October 2014, 

https://www.dazeddigital.com/artsandculture/article/22051/1/tao-lin-accused-of-statutory-
rape-and-emotional-abuse. Accessed 25 November 2019. 

 
Wu, Fan. “Brian Droitcour, ed., The Animated Reader: Poetry of ‘Surround Audience’ (New York: The 

New Museum, 2015).” C Magazine, vol. 127, 2015, pp. 66-67. 

 
Zimmerman, Amy. “The Star ‘Feminist’ Author Accused of Preying on Underage Girls.” The Daily 

Beast, 5 October 2018, https://www.thedailybeast.com/the-star-feminist-author-accused-
of-preying-on-underage-girls. Accessed 25 November 2019. 

