Platforming Inclusivity: Blaseball and an inclusive vision of browser games

On March 10th, Celebrities Deaths tweeted out an obituary  for the recently-deceased Raúl Leal. 
“The loss of Raul [sic] Leal is a devastating blow for @MiamiBlaseball [sic],” the linked obituary 
tells us. “Raul was a beautiful boy who feared no Umpire, feared no incineration and protected 
his team with his life.”  While it is not clear who this teammate was, why they might fear an 
umpire, or what horrifying incident led them to being incinerated, a savvy reader would 
quickly notice references to Blaseball.

1

2

In the summer of 2020, amidst the pandemic we still ﬁnd ourselves in the grip of, Los Angeles-
based studio The Game Band released Blaseball, a browser-based baseball simulator that 
combined the quintessential American sport with the darkly comical eldritch horror seen in 
recent years in works such as the podcast Welcome to Nightvale. The game is notable for its 
impassioned fanbase, who have latched onto the game and engage with it on a variety of online 
platforms. In the case of Raúl Leal’s obituary, game developer and critic Cat Manning notes that 
“[e]nough people tweeted about Raúl’s death that an algorithmically-driven obituary 
generating site reported on it as though a real person had died.”  While Celebrities Deaths is not 
the ﬁrst exploitative Twitter bot to be foiled by an enthusiastic audience (a much more 
prominent example would be the design-stealing bots that were trolled in later 2019 by canny 
artists ), the fact that the chatter around Raúl Leal’s death was intense enough to meet an 
algorithmic deﬁnition of a celebrity death speaks to the passionate and public engagement that 
fans have with Blaseball.

3

4

1

2

3

4

 @DEATHSNEWS
 Raúl Leal.
 @catacalypto
 Ramos

A curious aspect about Blaseball is that despite the shared passion fans  have for the game, the 
experience that gamers have when engaging with the game is surprisingly heterogenous. While 
some gamers will engage deeply with the stats that the site throws out while teams compete, 
others are primarily interested in the personas that the community develops for each player. 
Still more gamers may ﬁnd themselves interested less in the game itself and more in some of the 
epitexts.

5

Blaseball also stands alone in the developers’ support for a breadth of interpretations not just of 
the meaning of the work but also of ﬁne-grained details right down to the descriptions of the 
players on the teams. The developers want fast to be “empowered by the creative potential [of 
Blaseball] while also ensuring no one gets shut out by others’ personal interpretations.”  The 
Game Band help achieve this by employing a minimalist, text-forward interface, providing fans 
with API access to read the statistics, and establishing a community policy of not revealing 
information found through the API without ﬂagging it as such. The community has adopted the 
spirit of collaboration fostered by The Game Band, most notably by developing new 
technologies for the game’s fan wiki that build multiple interpretations into the fabric of the site. 
By leveraging these aspects of the technological underpinnings of the game, both The Game 
Band and the fans themselves have developed an inclusive environment where fans are 
welcome to enjoy the game on their own terms and have tools at their disposal to help facilitate 
that enjoyment without stepping on another fan’s toes.

6

When trying to understand the complicated interactions between gamers with different 
interests and different expectations of play, it’s helpful to ﬁnd some kind of framework or a 
point of comparison. As I considered this problem, my mind kept turning to Mia Consalvo’s 
work on cheating. In her analysis of cheating, Consalvo notes that players can be divided into 
different groups based on how they understand the concept of cheating, ranging from players 
who see it as something entirely beyond the pale to players who see cheating as nothing more 
than part of the ecosystem of gaming.  7

 A note on terms: normally the people who play a game would be referred to as “players,” but 
5
Blaseball can make this somewhat confusing because the in-game characters are themselves 
players. With this potential for confusion in mind, I am calling the in-game characters “players,” 
“teammates,” or “characters,” depending on context, and am calling the real-world people who 
participate in the cultural event of Blaseball “fans” or “gamers,” also depending on context. 
 Greszes
6
 Consalvo

7

It can be easy to see cheating as a zero-sum game, where cheaters and non-cheaters are put into 
strict opposition with no middle ground, but Consalvo’s study reveals greater nuance than that. 
Even within the strictest conception of cheating, there is a great deal of room for play, and for 
the same activities that might be considered cheating in one context would be deemed 
acceptable (if frowned upon) in another—for example, while players may frown upon someone 
who asks for help from a friend, they might accept it if the player “had already tried to ﬁgure 
out the situation on [their] own ﬁrst,”  and tell the player that they’re only cheating themselves. 
Cheating is a relational activity, and so any analysis of it must speak to a broader network of 
players.

8

I must note some caution at this point: I don’t think that members of the Blaseball community 
are cheating when they engage with the game in different ways, but rather that this model of 
community behaviour transfers well and can reveal important patterns of behaviour. Consalvo 
demonstrates that the concept of cheating is built on both technological and social interactions 
that go against the grain of what a player is expected to do in a way that confers an advantage, 
and that “[p]layers actively [make] ethical judgments about gameplay that extended beyond the 
coded rules of the game.”9

With Consalvo’s work in mind, I want to look at the technical and social components that create 
the space for multiple styles of play to coexist harmoniously, without the animosity or sense of 
zero-sum play that characterise gaming communities plagued by cheating. Blaseball’s platform 
is ultimately fundamental to the inclusive model of gaming that The Game Band developed and 
gamers extended. The centrality of browsers to inclusiveness is visible in many elements of the 
game, from the ability of stats-oriented gamers to explore Forbidden Knowledge without 
spoiling the fun of others to the colourful personas fans have developed for the players, and the 
ability for contradictory personas to coexist peacefully in the community. 

Much of Blaseball’s inclusiveness is tied to the way the game is presented through the fan’s web 
browser. Unlike many games, Blaseball features only a handful of graphical assets, and much of 
what appears at ﬁrst glance to be graphical elements, such as the teams’ logos, are actually 
emoji, and therefore textual in nature. Most importantly, the players themselves are entirely 
textual: fans can only see the player’s name, and a handful of statistics. There are no markers of 
gender, age, or ethnicity in the game, aside from what fans might infer from a player’s name, 
and even in that case clear indicators of these attributes are notably lacking. While a name like 
Isaac Johnson may imply gender and a vague sense of ethnicity, one look at Johnson’s 

8

9

 Ibid.
 Ibid.

teammates should sow doubt: how conﬁdent can we feel in our assumptions about Johnson 
when the Chicago Fireﬁghters lineup also includes Justice Spoon, Socks Maybe, Swamuel Mora, 
and Baby Triumphant?

The use of text and the evocative names encourages fans to imagine a diverse universe of 
players, with few limits on what a player might be. Fans have responded enthusiastically, and 
have crafted a variety of personas to match the names that include players of a variety of ages, 
genders, sexual orientations, and even species. The public data on each player leaves room for 
these interpretations without contradiction; 
when dealing with web content, however, it 
is important to remember that a site’s code is 
only ever hiding just beneath the surface.

Because Blaseball is a browser-based game, 
any fan can simply view the game’s source to 
see what is happening behind the scenes. 
There is a wealth of information available to 
fans interested in exploring this data, and The 
Game Band have facilitated these 
explorations by making an API available to 
the fans. The information itself breaks down 
into information that is publicly available, 
such as player names, team names, the 
current score, and other such statistics, as 
well as information that is not publicly 
available. This latter category includes a 
variety of statistics, some with known effects 
on the game and some without, including 
attributes such as moxie, totalFingers, 
shakespearianism, buoyancy, anticapitalism, 
and evolution.10

Fans can use their web browser’s source viewer to investigate 
the technological underpinnings of the game and to discover 

The information fans can discover through 
using the API causes a problem for an 
inclusive game: while analysing this 

The Blaseball API reveals a wealth of information about the 
teams and players. Above, the statistics for Core Mechanics 
player PolkaDot Patterson reveals cryptic statistics such as 
“anticapitalism” and “laserlikeness.”

 It is worth noting that attributes that would contradict fan interpretations of players are 
10
absent entirely: gender, sexual orientation, age, ethnicity, and other such attributes simply do 
not exist canonically.

information is a great deal of fun for those of us who enjoy peeking behind the curtain to see 
how everything runs, for other fans knowing this information can dispel some of the magic 
from the game. The zero-sum nature of this knowledge means that, in order to preserve the 
ability for both styles of play—spoiled and unspoiled—to coexist inclusively, there must be 
some kind of system to allow players who enjoy being spoiled to view this data without 
introducing it to players who prefer to enjoy the game unspoiled.

The platform itself provides some measure of protection. Accessing the API requires concerted, 
non-trivial effort, and even if a fan were to access it accidentally—say, by clicking an API link 
posted to a forum—they would ﬁnd an 
impenetrable wall of text that, for the most 
part, would reveal no secrets without 
additional processing. Teams, players, and 
other components of the game are 
represented by Universally Unique 
Identiﬁers (UUIDs), each of which is a 128-bit 
randomly-generated number composed of a 
series of hexadecimal digits that, due to the 
sheer quantity of numbers involved, is all-
but-guaranteed to be unique.
 Due to the 
length and variability of these numbers, a fan 
is highly unlikely to be able to memorise them, and would certainly not be able to recognise one 
at a glance, and as such, a player seeing a list of UUIDs will not be spoiled until they have cross-
referenced the IDs and produced a list that matches information across several API queries. The 
use of UUIDs, then, rather than a more transparent identiﬁer scheme, helps preserve a 
separations between different types of fan engagement.

Visiting https://www.blaseball.com/database/allTeams 
technically gives fans a glimpse of much of the inner workings 
of the teams, but most of the information is a collection of 
impenetrable UUIDs.

11

Of course, the technical measures The Game Band employ with the API are only useful up to 
the point that a fan has assembled all the data and connected stats to players. From that point 
on, sharing the compiled information can expose other fans to secrets and inner-workings that 
they may wish to remain ignorant of. To guard against this, The Game Band and fans have 
developed the concept of Forbidden Knowledge, which the Blaseball Wiki deﬁnes as “is a 
subset of information about Blaseball that we would consider canonical, but is considered 
signiﬁcantly spoiler heavy in any context.”  More explicitly, Forbidden Knowledge is  “the 

12

11

 Leach
 “Help:Forbidden Knowledge”
12

underlying structure and algorithmic makeup of the game and simulation that is hidden from 
public view, as opposed to information and mechanics visible on blaseball.com.”13

14

As a social system of signposting, the concept of Forbidden Knowledge ﬁts well with 
Consalvo’s understanding of attitudes towards cheating as existing on a continuum. On the one 
end, where Consalvo identiﬁes the “purist” who “believ[es] that anything other than a solo 
effort in completing a game is cheating,”  we can see an analogue to players who loathe the 
idea of encountering anything beyond information that’s completely public; on the other end of 
the continuum Consalvo identiﬁes players who see cheating as wrong only if it degrades 
another’s experience, and may even participate in cheating “for the pleasures it can bring,”  an 
attitude that we can see in the Society for Internet Blaseball Research (SIBR), a group that 
delights in digging into the hidden information in the game and producing deep analyses of the 
game’s statistics. Flagging Forbidden Knowledge allows both the purists and SIBR to coexist 
happily, as each group can make an informed choice and enjoy their preferred style of play 
without degrading the other’s experience.

15

Blaseball fans themselves have also been instrumental in using the affordances of the web 
platform itself to create spaces where multiple visions of the game can coexist without one or 
the other dominating the rest. This is especially apparent when examining how players have 
resolved the potential for friction between versions of the players themselves, which can differ 
greatly depending on the writer or artist behind a particular version.

Because, as discussed above, there is very little 
canonical information on players that deﬁnes 
their physical features, fans are free to assign 
their own preferences to each individual player, 
and no fan will ever ﬁnd that their own vision for 
the player is contradicted in the available data. 
Furthermore, because what little physical data 
there is on players—ﬁngers, being the most 
obvious—is considered Forbidden Knowledge, it 
is highly unlikely to factor into fans’ visions of 
the characters. Ultimately, any sense that there is 
a true form of a player is suspended indeﬁnitely, 

 Ibid.
13
 Consalvo
14
 Ibid.
15

Two different visions of the popular Jaylen Hotdogﬁngers 
player appear in the First Edition collection of Tlopps 
Blaseball cards.

and instead each version coexists with every other version, free from worry that an ofﬁcial 
proclamation will ever render it obsolete or even secondary.

Perhaps the best example of the indeﬁnitely suspended form of a Blaseball player is Pitching 
Machine, who originally joined the lineup of the Unlimited Tacos in Season 8 after the Tacos 
fans conspired to have the team’s entire pitching roster rendered unable to play.
 While the 
16
only description the game provides of Pitching Machine is the name, fans quickly ﬁlled out the 
details and began to craft a persona for the new pitcher.

While the obvious interpretation of “Pitching Machine” is the mechanical ball-throwing device 
used by players to practice their batting, Blaseball fans delight in ﬁnding oblique interpretations 
of the game. “Given blaseball’s naming conventions,” Philippa Warr writes, “Pitching Machine 
could be someone’s legit name OR it could be a robot with a blood collection.”  The two 
options Warr proposes are reﬂected in some of the many interpretations fans came up with for 
the player: a regular pitching machine wearing a cap , a Frankenstein-like assemblage , a 
humanoid robot

, and a largely human-appearing character.
20

17

19

18

21

Although the diverse conceptions of Pitching Machine are largely irreconcilable, the Blaseball 
community has developed a solution to allow each of these visions of the character to coexist. 
The developers of the Blaseball Wiki created a feature known as the “Interdimensional Rumour 
Mill,” (IRM) which “is a system of wiki extensions that allows for contributors to offer their 
unique interpretations of Blaseball players without invalidating any preexisting or future 
interpretations.”  Because the wiki is a webpage, the content being served to users can be 
changed each time the page is loaded, and so the IRM “will show the reader a randomly 
selected interpretation each time the page is reloaded.”  This system places all of the 

23

22

 “Pitching Machine”
16
 @philippawar
17
 @HetreaSky
18
 @2skele2bells
19
 @sparksel
20
 @occultclassic
21
 “Help:Interdimensional Rumor Mill Guide”
22
 Ibid.
23

interpretations on even footing and allows fans to encounter each interpretation with the same 
level of respect and gravitas as the next.

Another element that helps disrupt the sense that there might be an implied hierarchy or a 
preferred interpretation is the Interdimensional Frequency number, or IF. Similarly to the 
UUIDs discussed above, and unlike a serial number, which would imply some sense of order or 
chronology, the IF number is randomly generated  (with the possibility of being overridden for 
narrative purposes), and is described by the wiki’s administrators as being “a sort of radio 
station tuning to a speciﬁc dimension where your Rumor lives.”  This analogy underscores the 
degree to which these interpretations are a matter of taste: if a fan doesn’t like what they’re 
hearing, they can simply tune in to another station.

24

25

The IRM and the IF numbers demonstrate well the ways in which the affordances of the web 
can support diverse visions of a game: websites like the Blaseball Wiki can draw from a deep 
well of interpretations, giving fans an opportunity to contribute their own voice to the 
conversation and know that, at least some of the time, it will be the voice that other fans hear. 
By paying attention to the subtle hierarchies that can be established by serial numbers, 
thoughtful developers can develop numbering systems like UUIDs or IF numbers that offer 
gamers a non-hierarchical classiﬁcation system that nonetheless works seamlessly with the 
requirements of modern web technologies.

As the above examples show, between clever design that makes the most of the technological 
affordances of websites and the careful development of community expectations, it is possible 
for fans of a game to enjoy it in a number of radically-different-and-even-mutually-exclusive 
ways without ever jeopardising another fan’s ability to enjoy the game. While Blaseball is aided 
by a fanbase that, at least for now, does not have a segment of fans that goes out of its way to 
grief the other segments, it nonetheless shows the potential for other web-based games to foster 
such an agreeable and diverse community. Just as cheating must be understood at the 
intersection of technological exploits and social practices, so too must inclusive design: where 
the former must be understood so developers can prevent one group from ruining the fun of 
others, the latter must be understood so that developers can support all groups in their unique 
approaches to enjoying the game.

 Ibid.
24
 Ibid.
25

Works Cited

@2skele2bells. “my pitching machine pitch (ahaha): the pitching machine starting as a regular 
pitching machine but with the assistance of its team and gf and friends it is built into an 
android to better ﬁt its identity :] #blaseball (tldr; trans robot)” Twitter, 4 Nov. 2020. 3:58 
p.m., https://twitter.com/2skele2bells/status/1324123855410089986. Accessed 7 May 
2021.

@catacalypto. “The umpires' whims are random, at the simulation's discretion. Enough people 

tweeted about Raúl's death that an algorithmically-driven obituary generating site 
reported on it as though a real person had died. 2/? #manningblases” Twitter, 10 Mar. 
2021. 9:90 a.m., https://twitter.com/catacalypto/status/1369689715008360448. Accessed 7 
May 2021.

Consalvo, Mia. “Gaining Advantage: How Videogame Players Deﬁne and Negotiate Cheating.” 

Cheating: Gaining Advantage in Videogames. E-book, MIT P, 2007.

@DEATHSNEWS. “Raul Leal Death – Obituary : The loss of Raul Leal is a devastating blow for 

@MiamiBlaseball. Raul was a beautiful boy who feared no Umpire, feared no incine…” 
Twitter, 10 Mar. 2021. 7:27 a.m., https://twitter.com/DEATHSNEWS/status/
1369656106990075911. Accessed 7 May 2021.

“Help:Forbidden Knowledge.” Blaseball Wiki, https://www.blaseball.wiki/w/

Help:Forbidden_Knowledge. Accessed 7 May 2021.

“Help:Interdimensional Rumor Mill Guide.” Blaseball Wiki, https://www.blaseball.wiki/w/

Help:Interdimensional_Rumor_Mill_Guide. Accessed 7 May 2021.

@HeteraSky. “We've reached the ninth inning of my #miniblaseball series! Don't worry though 

#blaseball fans, I'm not stopping until I've drawn all 400+ players! 
ZIWA MUELLER 🗣  
LARS TAYLOR 🌞  
QAIS DOGWALKER 🚤  
PITCHING MACHINE 🌮  
Who's next??” Twitter, 22 Sep. 2020. 10:18 a.m., https://twitter.com/HetreaSky/status/
1308440443143634944. Accessed 7 May 2021.

Greszes, Sam. “An absurdist baseball game is tearing up the internet, thanks to fans.” Polygon, 

https://www.polygon.com/features/2020/8/6/21357131/blaseball-fans-absurd-
baseball-sim-the-game-band. Accessed 7 May 2021.

Leach, P. et al. “A Universally Unique Identiﬁer (UUID) URN Namespace.” RFC 4122. N.p., July 

2005. Accessed 7 May 2021. 

@occultclassic. “PITCHING MACHINE #blaseball” Twitter, 4 Nov. 2020. 7:25 p.m., https://

twitter.com/occultclassic/status/1324175902465351680. Accessed 7 May 2021.

@philippawarr. “Given blaseball's naming conventions, Pitching Machine could be someone's 
legit name OR it could be a robit with a blood collection” Twitter, 21 Sep. 2020, 10:25 a.m., 
https://twitter.com/philippawarr/status/1308079809394880513. Accessed 7 May 2021.

“Pitching Machine.” Blaseball Wiki, https://www.blaseball.wiki/w/Pitching_Machine. 

Accessed 7 May 2021.

Ramos, Jeff. “Artists are provoking Nintendo and Disney to sue bots that steal artwork.” 

Polygon, https://www.polygon.com/2019/12/5/20997056/i-want-that-on-a-shirt-bots-
copyright-infringement-twitter. Accessed 7 May 2021.

“Raúl Leal.” CelebritiesDeaths.com. 10 Mar. 2021, https://celebritiesdeaths.com/raul-leal-death-

obituary-the-loss-of-raul-leal-is-a-devastating-blow-for-miamiblaseball-raul-was-a-
beautiful-boy-who-feared-no-umpire-feared-no-incine/. Accessed 20 Apr. 2021.

@sparksel. “Oliver Notarobot <#'s Pitching Machine #blaseball” Twitter, 22 Sept. 2020. 12:12 
p.m., https://twitter.com/sparksel/status/1308469167427923970. Accessed 7 May 2021.

