Melinda M. White  
ELO 2021: Platform (Post?) Pandemic 
 
 
 

 

Plat(free)forms: accessible tools for new e-lit composers  

“In a participatory medium, immersion implies learning to swim, to do the things that the new 

environment makes possible.” -Janet Murray, Hamlet on the Holodeck 

 
For new “digital swimmers,” or those just dipping their toes into the pool for a semester or two, 
complicated (and expensive) technology and skill sets can sometimes hinder creative 
expression. As Davin Heckman argues, professors should “work diligently to create places in the 
curriculum that can include electronic literature as a standalone subject or part of a dynamic 
portfolio of rhetorical, computational, and/or aesthetic practices that make sense within a 
broader educational setting” (277). In addition to introducing students to electronic literature 
and multimodal writing, my goal as a teacher of digital creative writing, is to get students to 
“listen to their broccoli” (follow their intuition), as Anne Lamott suggests (110), and express 
their unique voices through multiple modes. As Troy Hicks expresses in Crafting Digital Writing: 
Composing Texts Across Media and Genres: 
 

I want to see our “digital generation” live up to their potential as conscientious 
citizens and creative producers of text in all forms. Sure, they can post status 
updates quicker than most of us adults can pull out our phones. Yet inviting 
them to be intentional about the craft of digital writing is perhaps the best way 
to help them realize their potential in academic, social, political, and community 
contexts. When we talk and teach thoughtfully about the elements of digital 
writing—words, images, sounds, videos, links, and other media elements—we 
are helping them be purposeful and, in turn, helping them be creative (19). 
 

Many assume that digital writing is natural for “digital natives,” but this is often a new, and 
sometimes intimidating, way of writing for them. By utilizing software that is accessible on their 
own computers and easy to navigate, students are less intimidated—free to create and focus 
on writing/composing. Although all software has its limitations, I’m seeing some wonderfully 
creative and thoughtful projects from my students. Particularly during Covid, I find students are 
writing more about their identities, mental health, social justice issues, and human connection.  
 
My digital creative writing courses are all “open education resource” (OER). “The Hewlett 
Foundation defines OER as ‘teaching, learning, and research resources that reside in the public 
domain or have been released under an intellectual property license that permits their free use 
and re-purposing by others” (as quoted by Bliss and Smith 12). OER isn’t new, it’s been around 
for nearly 20 years, but it can be a challenge, even in a digital course, to find all the readings 
and materials available online or to post PDFs without copyright infringement. In addition, I 
have been working to find open-source software for students to compose with. In the past, I 

White  1 

have relied heavily on the Adobe Creative Suite in my courses, which for my students is 
accessible and “free” on campus, so I let it slide for the OER course. Because it’s familiar to me, 
provides a blank canvas for design, and allows me to avoid teaching HTML coding, I have mainly 
taught Dreamweaver for hypertext projects. I have also always tried to incorporate free 
software options—Twine, Google Maps, and Knightlab storytelling tools—but found myself 
expanding these options even more this past year. With the spring 2020 pivot online, Adobe 
was not quite as easy to access (although the free subscriptions they offered were appreciated 
by several of my students) and students in the fall wanted to use their own computers and not 
those in the lab, understandably. Between my writing and e-lit courses, we explored Google 
Earth, Scene, and ThingLink for 360° work, and relied mostly on Twine and ThingLink for 
hypertext projects.  
 
MAPS (introducing multimedia (& nonlinearity)) 
I have always used map essays in my introductory courses as they are a simple way to introduce 
nonlinear narratives and fragmentation. The more straightforward interface allows students to 
open up to these concepts while still having control over the order of the narrative—a perfect 
medium for place and travel writing, with low-stakes technology. Both Google MyMaps and 
Knightlab’s StoryMap are easy-to-use platforms for new composers and useful in introducing 
multimodal writing. Students often gravitate toward writing about places or trips that were 
meaningful to them, from their childhood homes to how they move through the world.  

Students are often drawn to writing about their homes, some literally write about their own 
backyards, and some explore mapping journeys or a collection of significant moments that are 
tied to place. Since in this essay, medium is also already chosen, the subject matter is 
influenced by the affordances of the visual of the map. They also put thought into the 
navigation, some visual design—whether or not to include pictures and/or video and, if so, of 
what. In Lily Pudlo’s essay, “Backyard Adventure,” she writes about her childhood 
neighborhood through the lens of her child self, adventure stories in a small landscape. Another 
student, Maya Horton, wrote about adventure trips a little farther off, capturing meaningful 
outdoor trips in “Adventures in the Northeast” (see Fig. 1), that displayed personal growth and 
reflection. In her introduction she states:  

While I have grown and changed over the years, nature was a constant in my life. 
It was always there when I needed it. It has been an escape from reality, and a 
place where I could be my true self. It has given me a reason to keep going. It has 
literally given me a breath of fresh air when I was feeling stagnant and confined. 
It has been a place where I could simply just relax and have fun. It has put me in 
my place, held me accountable, helped me overcome my fears, and allowed me 
to realize things about myself and others.  

 
 

White  2 

Figure 1: “Adventures in the Northeast” by Maya Horton  

 

 
These essays fit with our discussion of creative travel writing, which, according to Bradway and 
Hesse, “has a strong narrative voice and a writer deeply and directly involved in the events of 
the place. The narrator is usually going somewhere new; a sense of adventuring into the 
unknown is nearly always the dominant tone, often inflected by physical and/or emotional risk” 
(Bradway and Hesse 24). These essays all express something about their authors, whether it is 
through childhood play or a travel adventure. This semester, Marielle Webster’s StoryMap, 
“The Year Before the World Ended,” recounts her last year of travel before the pandemic, 
especially meaningful upon reflection (see Fig. 2).  

White  3 

Figure 2: Screenshots from “The Year Before the World Ended” by Marielle Webster  

 

White  4 

Covid-19 has played a big role in the past year of creative projects. In my digital literature 
course in Spring 2020, the pivot to online classes in March happened to correspond to the 
collaboration section of my digital literature course (we read Scott Rettberg’s Electronic 
Literature). Instead of doing collaborative projects together on campus, I had to adapt that 
assignment and we used a collaborative Google Map (see Fig. 3) to map our location and how 
we were feeling about our new stay-at-home circumstances. The creative writing students also 
wrote a collaborative map about what home means to them, which would have been our in-
class free write.  
 

 

Figure 3: “Socialdistancingcollaboration” 
 
Both Map platforms have their limitations, of course. StoryMap is a very linear “slideshow”-
esque experience, Google Maps is also fairly linear, with points listed down the side, and both 
are templated, with limited design options. Once students have completed a map project, they 
are often excited to expand their design autonomy and create something from the ground up. 
Twine has been a great option for final hypertext projects.  
 
TWINE (for representation and social commentary) 
“As Twine author Porpentine puts it, ‘Twine simply exists and doesn’t belong to anyone except 
everyone’” (as quoted in Rettberg 104).  
 
I began using Twine when I first made my introductory course OER. Although I had heard about 
Twine in the e-lit community and heard presentations on the representation it afforded for 
feminist, mental health narratives, and LGBTQ+ stories and games, I had not yet used it myself. 
The limited need for straight-up HTML coding is valuable for students who are only writing e-lit 
for a semester. In this way, it’s not unlike Dreamweaver, but with an interface that doesn’t fully 
disguise HTML and CSS from the user; by copying and pasting the code from the amazing Twine 
wiki, the students don’t think of it as coding.  In 2012, the “Twine Revolution,” began: 

White  5 

 

It is a movement started by trans women, and then was expanded to other 
queer identities as well, arguably one of the most relevant resistance efforts in 
gaming. Kopas [20] makes, in her own words, a bold statement about the 
matter: ‘hypertext and digital games are totally trans genres’. Twine has 
presented itself as a platform that is very welcome to diverse narratives, which 
challenge the default premises of game design [16]. Even though Twine games 
are primarily based on text, there are plenty of ways in which Twine can explore 
visuality and sound within its narratives. The base HTML can be incremented 
with CSS and JavaScript elements, so as long as web technology keeps being 
pushed forward, Twine will not become outdated [26]. It is a very interesting 
tool with numerous possibilities for the development of not only diverse stories, 
but also new mechanics and logics to be incorporated within the textual 
narrative. (Bragança, Mota, & Fantini 938-9). 

 
These factors have made Twine an optimal platform for marginalized voices, with games like 
Zoe Quinn’s “Depression Quest” working to promote empathy for mental health and 
Porpentine’s “With Those We Love Alive” working to further LGBTQ+ representation. As Scott 
Rettberg points out in chapter 4 of Electronic Literature:  
 

The Twine community has also developed its own identity as a place of avant-
garde experimentation with language, gender, and identity. Twine is particularly 
popular with young authors who are arguably the first generation of ‘digital 
natives.’ This is electronic literature that emerged first not in online magazines, 
academic gatherings, festivals, or online databases, but instead on Tumblr feeds. 
(105).  

 
For students it’s proven an intuitive, easy-to-learn platform for branching multimodal 
narratives. I’ve had several students write about their LGBTQ+ identities or coming-out stories, 
often in video essays that have a more linear narrative, but Twine seems to be a natural 
platform for the expression of underrepresented identities and a medium in which students 
feel comfortable sharing their stories. Bridget Widrig, for instance, wrote about her first Pride 
experience with her girlfriend (see Fig. 4). With branching narratives, she gave the reader the 
choice of where to go (a cowgirl bar, Stonewall, etc.) and who to meet next, although each 
readthrough ended up in the same place with the first photo of the couple, wrapped in a pride 
flag and, as she says, “I felt so confident and content with who I am. Celebrating with the rest of 
the world how amazing it feels to be yourself, I felt so lucky to be there.” 

White  6 

Figure 4: Screenshots from “Pride” by Bridget Widrig  

 

White  7 

 
 
I’m also directing an honors thesis this semester and my student, Parker Ayotte, is writing a 
Twine story that includes social justice issues, such as racism and classism. There is also a 
nonbinary character dealing with injustice, and a second person “player” that is genderless 
(unlike some second person narratives, such as Calvino’s that gender the “you” as male). As 
Rettberg says, “While the underlying principles of Twine are based on hypertext, many Twine 
games have also adopted conventions from interactive fiction, such as the second-person form 
of address to the player character, spatial navigation through the narrative, and a sparse, 
economical style of writing” (105). This player/character is also held accountable for their 
actions, but most significantly, their inaction or passivity when confronted with issues of racism 
and injustice. The entire fiction ends in somewhat of a futile entropy, where the reader/player 
doesn’t really make a difference in the system, despite multiple possible endings.  
For example, in the “on the fence” ending: 
 

It’ll take a while, but slowly, you’ll push for more and more change… but is that 
the right thing to do? Sitting and silence and indirectly supporting the people you 
can’t stand? Plus, will your morals survive throughout the passing of decades? 
That’s up to you. I have already made my decision on your fate. By straddling the 
delicate line between hero and villain, all you do is incriminate yourself.  

 
Additionally, in the video for the “perfection incarnate” ending, the voice-over narration states: 
“Acting as a face of peace and change in the middle of oppression and social control, you will 
make a perfect member of Satan’s regime. I now know who you are and you have been 
judged.” Parker discusses in his analysis portion, the usefulness of Twine as a forum for 
representation and digital activism. He chose the platform over Dreamweaver, despite some 
limitations for what he wanted to accomplish, for the specific reason that it is more 
representational and embodies the social messages he’s conveying in his story (see Fig. 5).  
 

White  8 

 

Figure 5: Screen shots from “Promise of Paradise” by Parker, with reader name entry  
 
This is significant given current conversations in the ELO around ways to increase 
representation and diversity. Because of its accessibility and ease of distribution, Twine has 
been an essential tool for not only disseminating, but amplifying historically suppressed voices. 
Also turning up their collective volume through Twine, have been the neurotypical. Many 
students have been writing about mental health struggles in these platforms and I have found 
this ever-increasing during the Covid-19 pandemic. Maya’s Twine project, “A Mess of Emotions” 

 

White  9 

(see Fig. 6), for instance, documents her daily struggles in a “Covid journal,” that takes us 
through her inner dilemmas, struggles, and experiences, including contracting the virus along 
the way.  
 

 

Figure 6: Screenshots from “A Mess of Emotions” by Maya Horton 
 
And Stuart Moultrhop says of Twine in his article, “Hypertext Fiction Ever After”:  
 

 

As we [hypertext authors] once did, Twine writers want to do unlikely things 
with stories, making the most of simple, easily accessible technologies. Whether 
they acknowledge it or not, they are agents of a vital digital literacy, asserting 
word-based text, both in terms of prose and underlying code, as the locus or 
seriously meaningful play. Beyond this, as their enemies will say, they have an 

White  10 

agenda, setting out to defend the interests of women, gay and transgender 
people, the neuro-atypical, and others marginalized and excluded by the 
military-infotainment complex.  They are discontented with an arrogant, 
intolerant, casually violent society, and have set themselves against an 
entrenched culture industry. … they think of what they do—as play, as 
storytelling, or as an occupation of gamespace—they are carrying on a struggle. 
Hypertext fiction may never get out of the cloister, but its younger cousins have 
found their way to the streets (160). 

 
It will be interesting to see what the future of Twine looks like, what revolutionary texts will be 
rising from our “young cousins” in these tumultuous times. I find it interesting that among 
other scholarly work I’ve seen in Twine (including e-lit analyses) my student, Sabrina Brown, 
used this new platform to provide a historical overview of hypertext. Her scholarly project, “The 
World of Electronic Literature” (see Fig. 7), provides information on the form, including 
historical “characters” and genres (based on our textbook, Rettberg’s Electronic Literature).  
 

 

Figure 7: Screenshots from “World of Electronic Literature” by Sabrina Brown 
 
As mentioned earlier, the basics of Twine are straightforward, but more advanced things like 
audio, movement, image maps, etc. are not always as intuitive for students. My students have 

 

White  11 

managed video, audio, and some code-tweaking, but for things like image mapping, I suggest 
students consider ThingLink. This platform is extremely user-friendly and several of my students 
have used it to write about their identity and mental health.  
 
THINGLINK (a multimodal surprise) 
The simplicity of both Twine and ThingLink for hypertext essays has allowed these new digital 
swimmers to delve deeper into the platforms’ potential and their subject matter. I have been 
impressed with the complex projects being made in ThingLink, which at first glance seems like a 
very simple platform. I should add that for what we want to accomplish, it’s not free. But for a 
small fee, a teacher can have an educational account with multiple seats and add more as 
needed. It provides for inclusion of multiple modes—you can embed or add links to video, 360° 
environments, add sound, videos, and link multiple “pages” (projects) together. My 
introductory level students have no trouble learning the interface and executing their ideas.  
 
The ease of the platform interface allows students to focus on their creative expression. As 
these are nonfiction courses, often these projects are very personal, and many students write 
about their struggles and experience with mental health. Liberty Laarman, in her essay, “My 
Brain Probably Looks Like a Popcorn Ceiling,” for instance, created a simulacrum of her Spotify 
playlist, with stories behind each song, including experiences with her therapist and dealing 
with the loss of a friend (see Fig. 8).  
 

 

White  12 

Figure 8: Screenshots from “My Brain Probably Looks like a Popcorn Ceiling” by Liberty 
Laarman 
 
Since we read Shelley Jackson’s My Body: A Wunderkammer, I also see many hypertexts with 
body or mind maps, dealing with body image or mental health. Some examples include a map 
of someone’s “scatter brain,” showing her scattered nighttime thoughts and fears and this 
project, Brianna Jones’ “Hands” (see Fig. 9) that deals with self-expression, identity, and human 
vulnerability. 
 

 

White  13 

 

Figure 9: Screenshots from “Hands” by Brianna Jones 
 
The theme of the final project in the introductory course is “connections,” which can mean 
many things. My student, Samantha Stewart, really captured the idea of human 
interconnectedness in her essay, “Sonder” (see Fig. 10). Sonder, according to John Koenig 
means: “the realization that each random passerby is living a life as vivid and complex as your 
own” (Koenig). Sam captured this with a 360°-interactive image of a bustling Time Square, 
where we can see people passing each other as strangers, with text that promotes 
connectedness in the common human experience, very relevant during the past pandemic year.  
 

White  14 

 

 

Figure 10: Screenshots from “Sonder” by Samantha Stewart  
 
 
VR and other things 
ThingLink allows links on videos and also has 360° capabilities, seen in the “Sonder” piece. As 
students move toward more immersive storytelling, we have found accessible ways for them to 
compose “virtual” spaces, such as through Google Earth and Knightlab’s Scene, with 360° 
capable projects that can be read in Google Cardboard, an affordable VR viewer we have in our 
lab. Google Earth provides a similar interface to Google MyMaps, with satellite views and the 
addition of 360° street-view capabilities. Utilizing the 3D option provides an immersive 
experience, where readers can feel like they are exploring a place (see Fig. 11). The Google 

White  15 

Earth platform is still user-friendly and students often use these projects to explore their homes 
or travels. In one project, a student explored multiple possible futures as they prepared to 
graduate in a pandemic to an uncertain future.  
 

Figure 11: Example map for Digital Literature, 360° view 
 
Scene provides easy upload of panoramic or full 360° images, with added text, for simple VR 
projects. When we left campus last spring, since we could no longer use the lab, I adapted the 
VR unit and we explored these platforms, mostly close to home, including my front porch (see 
Fig. 12). I look forward to VR technology becoming more accessible in the future, so students 
can explore more immersive creativity.  
 

 

Figure 12: Example Scene from my front porch 

 

White  16 

Of course, there are other plat(free)forms out there, these are just a few that we have 
explored. In addition, I have offered students the opportunity to remediate Nick Montfort’s 
work, “Taroko Gorge.” Trevor Arseneau made “Gorge of Anathema,” which conveyed some of 
the frustration at the beginning of our lockdown last spring (see Fig. 13).  
 

 

Figure 13: “Gorge of Anathema” by Trevor Arseneau 
 
This semester I’m teaching an intermediate course and tried out Knightlab’s Timeline, an 
elegant tool for chronological projects. Although Timeline was not as straightforward as the 
other Knightlab software we’ve used, once students got past the learning curve and the Excel 
spreadsheet interface, the projects turned out quite well. The spreadsheet makes it simple to 
add images, media, and text, change font and background color, etc. A short publishing process, 
consisting of copying the link to the Timeline website, provides a permanent URL. This is one of 
the great things about StoryMap and Scene as well, students do not have to worry about 
publishing to and maintaining their own domain space, the projects are already hosted. This 
project, Caroline Goodwin’s “My Year of Covid: a 2020 Timeline” (see Fig. 14), documents her 
experience during Covid, similar to “A Mess of Emotions,” with news clips and personal stories, 
including participation in a Black Lives Matter protest. Students in this class are currently busy 
with meaningful and imaginative final projects in multiple platforms (Twine, ThingLink, Google 
Earth, and Knightlab’s StoryMap and Scene), as well as students in the introductory class 
composing the final “connections” projects in Twine and ThingLink.  

White  17 

 

Figure 14: Screenshots from “My Year of Covid: a 2020 Timeline” by Caroline Goodwin 
 
 
Conclusion 
The simplicity of the software has allowed these new digital swimmers to delve deeper into the 
platforms’ potential and their subject matter. Daniel Anderson discusses the benefits of 
introducing students to unfamiliar technologies in his article, “From a Pedagogy of 
Multiliteracies: Designing Social Futures”: “engaging technical things comes with a bigger 

White  18 

payoff. Experimenting with unfamiliar technologies can facilitate a sense of creativity that can 
lead to motivation” (363). This is particularly significant in creative writing, where exploring the 
creative affordances of the media seems to extend to the words, the topics, and the stories as 
themselves. Students learn technical skills as they compose, often from each other. Digital 
platforms, these “unfamiliar technologies,” often take them out of their comfort zone, which 
seems to spark more creativity, thinking outside the norms of a print essay, and a deeper and 
more thoughtful self-expression. They currently seem to be thinking and writing from a deeper 
social perspective too, shining through the cracks caused by this time of upheaval, intent on 
healing this broken society.  
 
As Davin Heckman asks in his article, “Inventing Pedagogies for Electronic Literature”: “Can 
electronic literature open up a critical perspective on society during a period of radical historical 
upheaval?” (277). Let’s hope so. Seeing/playing/participating in new immersive and mobile 
works from the National Film Board of Canada, like “Far Away from Far Away,” “Bubble,” and 
“Motto,” and work like “Yesterday Today and Tomorrow” and “Infinite Worries Bash” in the Fall 
issue of The New River Journal that are collaborative voices—political, social, and personal, my 
students are feeling connected and a part of the current zeitgeist. There is very much a feeling 
of we are all in this together. The projects the students are composing, what would be 
categorized as “Third Generation E-lit,” that “builds upon existing forms” and “adopts existing 
interfaces” (Flores 38), are still bursting with originality and creativity, perhaps the form even 
broadening the creative scope of their ideas.  These accessible platforms enable expression, 
particularly of marginalized voices, as Twine has been used widely in the LGBTQ+ community, 
while also providing potential for exploring virtual spaces with minimal technology. As Anne 
Frances Wysocki says in Writing New Media, “When someone makes an object that is both 
separate from her but that shows how she can use the tools and materials of her time, then she 
can see a possible self—a self positioned and working within the wide material conditions of 
her world, even shaping that world—in that object” (21). These student projects show how less 
technical, more accessible plat(free)forms can be used to create political, diverse, and deeply 
personal narratives, allowing digital learners to shape their worlds and add their voices to the 
world of e-lit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

White  19 

 
Works cited  
 
Anderson, Daniel. “The Low Bridge to High Benefits: Entry-Level Multimedia, Literacies,  

and Motivation.” Multimodal Composition: A Critical Sourcebook.  Claire  
Lutkewitte, ed. Boston: Bedford/St. Martin’s, 2014. 

 
Arseneau, Trevor. “Gorge of Anathema.” 2020. English 693, Digital Literature. University of New  

Hampshire. Remediation of “Taroko Gorge” by Nick Montfort.  

 
Ayotte, Parker. “Promise of Paradise.” 2021. English Honor’s thesis project. University of New  

Hampshire. Twine fiction.  

 
Bliss, T. J., and M. Smith. “A Brief History of Open Educational Resources.” Open: The  

Philosophy and Practices That Are Revolutionizing Education and Science, edited by  
Rajiv S. Jhangiani and Robert Biswas-Diener, Ubiquity Press, London, 2017, pp. 9–28. 
JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctv3t5qh3.6. Accessed 15 Apr. 2021. 

Bradway, Becky and Doug Hess. Creating Nonfiction, a Guide and Anthology. Boston:  

Bedford/St. Martin’s, 2009. 

Braganca, Luiza C., Rosilane R. Mota, and Eduardo P.C. Fantini. Twine Game Narrative and  

discussion about LGBTQ representation. Proceedings of SBGames 2016. Culture Track. 
http://www.sbgames.org/sbgames2016/downloads/anais/157380.pdf 

 
Brown, Sabrina. “The World of Electronic Literature.” 2020. English 693, Digital Literature.  

University of New Hampshire. Twine analysis.  

 
Flores, Leonardo. “Third-Generation Electronic Literature.” Electronic Literature as  

Digital Humanities. Dene Grigar and James O’Sullivan, eds. New York: Bloomsbury 
Academic, 2021.  

Goodwin, Caroline. “My Year of Covid: a 2020 Timeline.” 2021. English 623, Digital Creative  

Nonfiction. University of New Hampshire. Knightlab Timeline creative nonfiction.  
 

Heckman, Davin. “Inventing Pedagogies for Electronic Literature.” Electronic Literature as  

Digital Humanities. Dene Grigar and James O’Sullivan, eds. New York: Bloomsbury 
Academic, 2021.  

Hicks, Troy. Crafting Digital Writing: Composing Texts Across Media and Genres. Portsmouth,  

NH: Heinemann, 2013.  

 

White  20 

Horton, Maya. “Adventures in the Northeast.” 2020. English 501, Digital Writing. University of  

 
 

New Hampshire. Google Map creative nonfiction.  
 
“A Mess of Emotions.” 2020. English 501, Digital Writing. University of  
New Hampshire. Twine creative nonfiction.  

 
Jones, Brianna. “Hands.” 2020. English 501, Digital Writing. University of  

New Hampshire. ThingLink creative nonfiction.  

Koenig, John. “Sonder: The Realization That Everyone Has A Story.” Film. A Lust for Life.  

https://www.alustforlife.com/videos/sonder-the-realization-that-everyone-has-a-story 

Laarman, Liberty. “My Brain Probably Looks Like a Popcorn Ceiling.” 2020. English 501, Digital  

Writing. University of New Hampshire. ThingLink creative nonfiction.  
 

Lamott, Anne. Bird by Bird: Some Instructions on Writing and Life. New York: Anchor Books,  

 
1995. 
 

Moulthrop, Stuart. “Hypertext Fiction Ever After.” Electronic Literature as Digital Humanities.  

Dene Grigar and James O’Sullivan, eds. New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2021.  

Murray, Janet. Hamlet on the Holodeck. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1998.  

 

Pudlo, Lily. “Backyard Adventure.” 2020. Digital Writing. University of New Hampshire. Google  

Map creative nonfiction.  

 
Rettberg, Scott. Electronic Literature. Cambridge: Polity, 2019. 
 
Stewart, Samantha. “Sonder.” 2020. Digital Writing. University of New Hampshire. ThingLink  

360° creative nonfiction.  

 
Webster, Marielle. “The Year Before the World Ended.” 2021. English 501, Digital Writing.  

University of New Hampshire. Knightlab StoryMap creative nonfiction.  

 
Widrig, Bridget. “Pride.” 2020. English 501, Digital Writing. University of New Hampshire. Twine  

creative nonfiction.  

 
Wysocki, Anne Frances. “Opening New Media to Writing: openings & justifications.”  

Writing New Media: Theory and Applications for Expanding the Teaching of  
Composition. Logan, Utah: Utah State UP, 2004. 

 

White  21 

