Executable Landscapes: Speculative Platforms for Ecological E-Literature 

 

Dr. Richard A Carter, University of Roehampton (richard.carter@roehampton.ac.uk) 

 

Keywords 

Electronic Literature, Digital Art, Platforms, Ecology, Infrastructure, Sensors, Esoteric Code, 

Code Poetry 

 

Paper 

 

It  is  no  revelation  to  observe  that  the  contemporary  digital  environment  is  made  possible 

through a matrix of behemoth infrastructures that traverse the orbital, atmospheric, oceanic, 

and  terrestrial  domains.  These  infrastructures  manifest  not  only  in  the  narrowly  technical 

sense,  but  encompass  the  manufacturing  chains,  regulatory  interfaces,  and  geopolitical 

contexts that enable (or forestall) the development, deployment, and maintenance of digital 

systems  at  a  global  scale.  Underpinning  all  these  aspects  are  the  flows  of  energy  and 

materials constituting the liveable Earthly ecology. The latter comprises the ultimate baseline 

‘platform’ on which discrete digital platforms, as more commonly expressed, are enabled—but 

that, being so defined, obscure these far larger structures and processes  in which they are 

embedded. It is here that we can note something of a paradox, in that the global scale of digital 

infrastructure  is  now  foundational  to  the  charting  and  modelling  of  a  rapidly  deteriorating 

planetary ecology—as achieved through satellites, drones, remote buoys, weather stations, 

datalinks, supercomputers—but this comes with a recognition that it is both a product, and a 

critical  facilitator,  of  economic  processes  that  are  driving  the  very  pollution,  wastage,  and 

largely unhindered exploitation behind the calamitous signals they detect. 

 

One concept that has been deployed, in various guises, to characterise these endlessly 

entangled circumstances is that of the ‘Anthropocene’. Emerging as an epochal marker of the 

ineradicable inscriptions of global human activity, definitions of the Anthropocene have rested 

variously  on  either  the  technogenic  geologies  of  nuclear  residues,  or  the  exponential 

geophysical  shifts  being  picked  up  and  characterised  by  electronic  sensors,  mathematical 

models,  and  computerised  simulations.  In-turn,  the  Anthropocene  has  provided  a  much 

broader  vehicle  for  expressing  a  suitably  grand,  hubristic  fable  concerning  the  planetary 

conditions brought forth by human activity, and how the supreme agency of the latter, over the 

former, is bringing about their mutual downfall. 

 

There are, of course, many reductionist problematics encapsulated in this latter account 

of  the  Anthropocene,  and  its  presumptions  of  a  unified  human  culpability  with  equally 

distributed consequences. We may note that even the gravely scientific emphasis on nuclear 

boundary  markers  reveals  a  very  particular  set  of  contexts,  with  their  associated  political, 

economic,  and  material  histories,  that  have  instigated  and  are  shaping  the  dangers  of  the 

present moment—as well as defining the forums in which it is mapped and characterised. It is 

in  recognition  of  these  gaping  aporia  that  there  have  been  many  dozens  of  varied  ‘cenes’ 

generated  across  the  academic  world,  seeking  either  to  better  account  for  the  particular 

histories, processes, and implications of current ecological perils, or, indeed, to suggest how 

these might be responded to justly (see Chwałczyk 2020, for instance, who charts no less than 

80-90 distinct variations). 

 

I  have  outlined  previously  how  digital  art  and  electronic  literature  have  responded  to 

some  of  the  implications  of  the  Anthropocene  hypothesis,  and,  indeed,  the  uncomfortable 

relationship  between  the  expressive  richness  of  the  digital  medium  and  its  profound 

entanglement with environmentally damaging paradigms (see Carter 2020). In reflecting on 

these  aspects,  I  recall  how  early  digital  art  sought  to  demonstrate  (with  admittedly  varying 

success) different possibilities for computing beyond militarised technoscience, and it appears 

that the creative and critical challenge today is to rework and reframe digital platforms so they 

might  perform  and  inspire  substantive  ecological  critique  and  expression,  rather  than  be 

relegated  only  as  perpetuators  of  extractive,  accelerationist,  technocentric  paradigms. 

Contemporary  electronic  literature,  in  its  very  particular  fusions  of  data,  writing,  and  the 

algorithmic, affords rich experimental pathways for just this kind of work—as deftly illustrated 

by the recent outputs of artists such as J.R. Carpenter (2019, 2018, 2016) and Eugenio Tisselli 

(2020).  Raley  (2011)  similarly  observed  an  ‘ecological  turn’  in  emerging  digital  poetic 

practices, and Naji (2021) has recently developed an extended critical account of the valuable 

role  played  by  the  ‘literary  algorithm’,  as  instantiated  across  varied  digital  poetic  texts,  in 

exploring  and  critiquing  reflexively  the  foundational  structures  and  processes  of  digital 

systems, articulating their implications for both the living and material worlds. 

 

My own creative and critical practices have centred also on exploring not only how digital 

writing can bring about new ways of framing and understanding its sociotechnical contexts, 

but also its capacity to chart different speculative futures concerning digital technologies more 

broadly.  That  is,  to  enact  what  the  digital  world  might  resemble  concretely  if  the  critical 

perspectives  it  is  subjected  to  were  adopted  as  a  key  aspect  of  its  future  design  and 

deployment—of  what  kinds  of  activities,  artefacts,  and  infrastructures  might  emerge  in 

response, with an emphasis on the ecological impacts of digital systems. Given the challenges 

of the present moment, and the troubling futures ahead, the aspiration here is not to suggest 

a specific path forward—which would repeat the mistakes inherent to unified accounts of the 

Anthropocene, with its implication of  unified solutions—but to help enact a range of partial, 

provisional investigations that catalyse an agility of thought and practice: to enact a spectrum 

of stories and ways of seeing that resist the destructive influence of monologic narratives. 

 

In pursuing this speculative approach towards my research and practice, I have found 

resonances  in  the  work  of  various  theorists  concerning  the  need  for  new  kinds  of  media 

critique, with speculative practice affording a rich a site of enquiry and reflection. I would cite 

in  this  vein  Parikka’s  (2015)  ‘speculative  media  archaeologies’,  Agre’s  ‘critical  technical 

practice’ (1997), and Jones ‘distributed critique’ (2020), which forwards a need for modes of 

investigation that are conducted across the multiplicity of sites, platforms, practices, and ways 

of perceiving and knowing that constitute the digital world. Jones offers a particularly succinct 

expression here of the value of artistic approaches and attitudes in making possible this mode 

of critique-in-practice: 

 

 

Critical new media art encapsulates the “foreign entanglements” we encounter through 

data,  updates,  visualisations  and  other  affective  intensities  of  the  Internet,  and  turns 

them  into  a  subject  of  study.  The  demands  placed  on  the  critique  of  new  media  art 

practices are great, but they secondarily offer to create the communities of knowledge-

making that we need, rather than the ones we have inherited from humanist and science 

traditions. Embracing the problem of art practice as generative puts art at the service of 

thought in a serious way (6). 

Jones  goes  on  to  observe  that  digital  artistic  practice  functions  not  in  response  to  fully 

predetermined questions, issues, and even potential answers, with their attendant specialist 

disciplinary frames, but instead develops these aspects as part of their inherent contingencies 

and uncertainties. The act of wrestling with the complexities of digital activities, artefacts, and 

environments through speculative endeavours serves to both denature and reconfigure their 

predominant  modalities,  and,  from  this,  to  see  what  they  may  yet  become.  Such  grand 

ambitions  will  never  be  actualised  fully  within  the  space  of  any  one  artistic  process  or  its 

outcomes, but the latter functions instead as a distributed site of investigation that can catalyse 

others subsequently—the act of critique being always a collaborative process, than a discrete 

declaration. 

 

It is in a similar spirit that my experimental practice of recent years has brought together 

diverse,  unconventional  assemblages  of  digital  systems  and  scholarly  reflection,  with  this 

aspect forming the core of their creative expression and critical potential. Over the course of 

several  projects,  I  have  developed  often  elaborate  processes  that  entangle  cameras, 

satellites,  drones,  web  graphics,  esoteric  code,  academic  writing,  and  the  printed  codex, 

seeking  to  investigate  what  their  complex,  contingent  exchanges  can  reveal  about  the 

structures, dynamics, and possibilities of the contemporary environment. The hybrid art-texts 

resulting are thus better understood as being enacted across these different platforms, and so 

deriving  their  creative  and  critical  force  as much  by  encouraging  reflection  on  these  varied 

aspects and processes, as the actual markings they leave behind. 

 

A particular gesture that characterises my recent investigations into digital writing is the 

use of technologies ostensibly focused on the capturing of images for the production of text. 

Across several projects, I have deployed imaging sensors and systems as a means through 

which different kinds of visual data are gathered and analysed about ecologically provoking 

scenes,  before  using  this  to  actualise  corpus-derived  data-structures  into  various  ‘human-

readable’ configurations—which, nevertheless, may or may not adhere to the conventions of 

‘natural’ language. In transforming images to text, my aim is to meditate on the performative 

multivalency of data itself, and, following this, how algorithmic structures are neither inherently 

visual nor textual in their operations, but parse a multiplicity of rapidly mutating symbols and 

values. Image-to-text conversions can depict the enacted (as opposed to inherent) status of 

all visual data, involving algorithmic routines that act not on colours, textures, and form, but 

on matrices of values, encoded thresholds, and filter gates. 

 

While this might all suggest a forbidding disconnect between human and machinic ways 

of seeing and knowing, it also emphasis how visual data, being rendered as such and not a 

straightforward window onto the world, can be articulated in different ways so as to become 

‘prehensible’,  and  that  the  predominant  modes,  such  as  colour-coded  images  and 

visualisations,  are  not  the  only  such  available.  Moreover,  textual  parsing  does  not  simply 

substitute one mode of representation for another, as provide a means of invoking contexts 

and frames of reference and understanding beyond what is suggested ostensibly by the image 

as a purely visual formation. Given the critical role played by ocular paradigms of sensing and 

knowing the world in Western technoscience, and its depiction as rendering transparencies 

through  which  to  capture,  rather  than  in-fact  perform,  the  observable,  my  aim  here  is  to 

express the inherent performativity of data-generating architectures, and so establish a space 

for formulating new stories concerning how the world is known and acted upon by human and 

machine alike. The ultimate aspiration behind such efforts, however tentative, is to encourage 

reflection on the other possible ways of knowing and being in the world that can better attend 

to the challenges of life in the Anthropocene, howsoever understood. 

 

One  such  project  I  have  discussed  at-length  in  the  past,  and  which  I  have  had  the 

privilege of seeing discussed by others, is Waveform (2017—) (see Carter 2018; Naji 2021). 

This project uses drone footage, machine vision routines, and generative text algorithms to 

produce  output  sequences  depicting  the  transformation  of  incoming  ocean  waves  into 

enigmatic, poem-like texts. This project raises questions concerning the nature and potentials 

of machine sensing in characterising the observable world, with an emphasis on the myriad 

phenomena these systems fail to prehend about life in an imperilled ecology—in terms of its 

myriad  uncertainties,  perceptual  aporia,  and  affective 

tensions—but  also  enacting, 

speculatively, an instance of how it may yet still contribute to creative meditations on these 

aspects. 

 

Another ongoing project in this vein is Orbital Reveries (2020—). This project performs 

a  similar  undertaking  to  Waveform  in  its  gathering  of  terrestrial  satellite  imagery,  compiled 

from  the  Landsat  Earth  Observation  programme,  and  sequencing  it  through  a  chain  of 

algorithmic processes to compose generative visual ‘textscapes’ (see Carter 2021). As with 

Waveform,  a  machine  vision  algorithm  is  used  to  analyse  and  define  the  apparent  terrain 

signatures  of  a  given  source  image,  with  the  data  obtained  being  then  used  to  mobilise  a 

database  of  textual  sources  that  variously  encompass  satellite  imaging,  geophysical 

terminology, and ecocritical writing. This project extends the enquiry conducted by Waveform 

into  machinic  modes  of  sensing  and  making  sense  of  the  world,  engaging  in-particular  the 

critical  role  of  multispectral  satellite  imagery  in  underpinning  a  globalised,  managerial 

approach towards the  Earth—as  an  expression of  a  geopoliticised  ‘whole  Earth’  discourse, 

with its emphasis upon strategies of abstraction, enclosure, and control. In transforming the 

multispectral,  technoscientific  imagery  generated  by  the  satellite  gaze  into  consciously 

experimental  outcomes,  Orbital  Reveries  aims  to  resist  popular  conceptions  of  the  ocular-

centric  transparency,  objectivity,  and  perceptual  totality  of  satellite  sensing,  which  is 

predicated  on  the  suggestively  Cartesian  outlooks  of  its  constituent  nodes:  physically  and 

functionally  removed  from  Earthly  disorder,  and  unreachable  by  anything  other  than  the 

commanding interests of state or corporate actors. 

 

I am presently writing at-length about Orbital Reveries as part of forthcoming work, and 

so I would like to dedicate the remaining balance of this paper to outlining a project that is still 

something of a work-in-progress, but is mature sufficiently as to depict both its key principles 

and where my practice will stand in the coming future—and so, it is hoped, offer fruitful points 

of reflection as such. The project in question is entitled Landform and, as its name suggests, 

it follows directly from my work with Waveform, in responding to three interrelated enquiries 

that  emerged  from  conversations  the  latter  has  generated  at  various  conferences, 

presentations, and public events. 

 

The first such enquiry centred on how, in Waveform, the drone imagery is treated as a 

body  of  variables  within  a  chain  of  algorithmic  processes:  a  data-structure  that  cues  the 

behaviour of specific operations, but does not exert any further influence. This instigated the 

question  of  whether  imaging  data  might  itself  function  as  a  means  of  assembling,  and  not 

simply  driving,  specific  compositional  routines—to  operate  algorithmically  in  its  own  right, 

rather than as an array of stored values. Such ideas were inspired partly by Farocki’s (2004) 

notion of the ‘operative image’, in which visual data rarely exists for human prehension alone, 

but  instead  is  transformed  and  manipulated  across  an  array  of  machinic  contexts  for  the 

automated  fulfilment  of  specified  operational  goals.  From  this  perspective,  the  source 

phenomena  driving  these  sensory  routines  are  treated  not  as  exteriorities  to  be  simply 

recorded, but as structures awaiting execution: to be parsed and reprogrammed into a more 

orderly,  comprehensible,  and  manipulable  structure—an  expression, 

indeed,  of 

the 

foundational paradigm behind all digital computing and signal processing architectures, and 

their predominant employments subsequently. Being so deeply embedded, the challenge is 

to find ways of making visible these aspects that otherwise manifest far beyond the spatial 

and temporal scales of the human senses. 

 

A  second  enquiry  coming  out  of  Waveform  concerned  what  other  kinds  of  textual 

formation might be enabled through an image-to-text generation process. In Waveform, the 

outputs were formatted to resemble very short poetic statements, and I initially characterised 

these as such, somewhat playfully. Nonetheless, while I found the image of a drone writing 

poetry rather appealing—in contrast to the threatening,  gravely utilitarian tropes  associated 

with drones in popular discourse—audience reactions have tended to dwell on the final output 

text itself as the ultimate end of the generative process, rather  than it forming but only one 

aspect.  Text  resembling  traditional  modes  of  prose  and  poetry  certainly  encourage  such 

reactions, along with their associated questions about AI routines replacing human agency. 

This  belies  the  fact  that  drones  and  imaging  algorithms  are  machinic,  more-than-human 

formations that parse the world in ways beyond the frames of language—and the same applies 

to the text generating routines I have sought to connect them to. Therefore, I sought to explore 

how these operations might be captured better in the character of the generated outcomes, to 

bear  out  the  structures  and  processes  from  which  they  have  emerged,  and  so  facilitate 

reflection on these aspects. 

 

One last point of creative response, giving shape to the very subject matter of Landform, 

is  that  Waveform  engages  the  most  visible  manifestation  of  a  more-than-human  world 

undergoing a continuous process of becoming, the coastline, and I wanted subsequently to 

depict  settings,  and  engage  themes,  that  are  more  suggestive  of  the  multitude  of  ways  in 

which ostensibly natural landscapes bear the marks of human activity—a foundational theme 

of much eco-critical thought around the exact status of the ‘natural’, especially in an age of the 

Anthropocene hypothesis. 

 

It is from within these dialogues of thought and practice that the catalyst for Landform 

has emerged. This project takes the form of landscapes photographed from the vantage point 

of  a  low-flying  camera  drone,  before  having  these  images  parsed  through  a  program  that 

converts its constituent brightness signatures into circuitous, diagrammatic visual algorithms. 

The instructions encoded within this algorithm are then executed with the aid of a specially 

developed interpreter routine, composing a generative textual formation that draws from the 

vocabularies  of  scholarly  texts  discussing  ecological  concerns.  This  formation  does  not 

manifest  as  a  conventional  block  of  text,  but  is  encoded  as  a  JSON  (‘Javascript  Object 

Notation’) object, which is a simple data structure consisting of labelled attribute tags and their 

associated values—in this case, keywords followed by arrays of interrelated words. This JSON 

object  is  placed  subsequently  alongside  the  visual  algorithm  and  its  source  to  constitute  a 

triptych of images that illustrate each stage of the creative process (see Fig. 1). 

 

 

 

 

 

main: { 
 
δ: { 
 
 
 

}, 
Φ: { 

engage: [investigate], 

symbolic: [linguistic, 
logical], 

 
 

}, 
Ψ: { 

real: [urban, organic, 
architectural, technical], 

}, 

 
}; 

 

 

Fig. 1. A depiction of the final outputs. Note that the text in the bottom-right image 
is a highly abridged excerpt from the far longer sequence generated by the visual 
algorithm in the bottom-left. The source text for this piece was Parikka (2015). 

To unpack more slowly this highly elliptical undertaking (although constraints of space 

prevent a fully detailed account), it can be noted firstly that in its prototype iteration, Landform 

is sourcing its imagery from a series of drone flights conducted over parts of North Cornwall, 

in  the  United  Kingdom—encompassing  a selection  of  moorland regions  and  coastal  areas. 

This  footage  was  taken  considerably  before  the  current  COVID19  pandemic  and  its 

accompanying travel restrictions, and not, initially, with the intention of it being used as part of 

an artistic project. Nevertheless, what is captured in the existing footage are sites inscribed by 

the marks of human activity in various guises—from quarries, to runways, to the ghosts of iron 

age communities. Despite its official status as an area of ‘Outstanding Natural Beauty’, with 

its idyllic implications, there is no area of North Cornwall that does not bear the signs of human 

settlement,  cultivation,  and  extraction,  and  this  affords  an  apposite  opening  domain  for 

capturing  the  ecological  entanglements  driving  Landform.  Once  the  safety  concerns  of  the 

pandemic abate, it is planned to visit other such areas across the United Kingdom, and  so 

explore their complex status as sites that celebrate the more-than-human ‘natural’ world while 

being firmly marked and enclosed by human activity. 

 

The  transformation  of  the  gathered  landscape  imagery  into  poetry  is  a  necessarily 

complex, multistage process. Initially, the digital images are processed by a system that treats 

them  only  as  an  array  of  grayscale  brightness  signatures.  These  signatures  cue  a  plotter 

algorithm  that  draws  across  the  surface  of  this  grayscale  array,  with  the  differences  in 

brightness  between  individual  and  contiguous  blocks  of  pixels  determining  its  directional 

vectors—the only constraint being that it is not permitted to overlap previously inscribed areas. 

The coordinates that make up this plotter trail are then processed by another routine that treats 

these vectors as a series of encoded instructions—effectively, what might be characterised as 

an elementary ‘esoteric’ visual programming language. These instructions are then used to 

navigate and actualise a multi-dimensional data-structure generated by a separate routine that 

charts  the  detected  relations  between  different  grammatical  units  in  a  source  corpus.  The 

instructions  of  the  visual  algorithm  effectively  specify  a  series  of  lookup  coordinates, 

determining  which  sequences  of  interrelated  words  are  pulled  out  of  this  data  structure  for 

composing the final textual formation. The specific use of the JSON format, as a means of 

rendering this text, allows its word sequences to be grouped and displayed in a manner that 

adheres closely to their encoded representations in the system, and thus, their status as a 

data objects generated by machinic modes of textual parsing. 

 

The  source  texts  themselves  are  currently  a  mixture  of  academic  works  exploring 

ecological writing, sensory apparatus, or media materialities, such as Barad (2003), Edwards 

(2020),  Engelmann  (2021)  and  Parikka  (2015).  While  none  of  these  sources  could  be 

discerned or reconstructed by examining the final JSON object into which they are arrayed 

(relying instead on citations in their accompanying artist’s statements) the latter nonetheless 

articulates a partial map of their lexical relations. The creative and critical gesture here is to 

concretely entangle these texts within the very systems, sensors, and digital apparatus they 

explore  and  critique,  and  thus,  in-turn,  highlight  the  discourses  surrounding  these  systems 

concerning how they parse and render the world as perceivable and knowable. 

 

Taken as a whole, Landform is an effort at developing a hybrid, visual-textual work that 

advances  the  kinds  of  speculative  digital  platforms  I  have  outlined  above,  wherein  the 

entanglements  between  human  and  more-than-human  domains  (whether  environmental  or 

machinic)  are  staged,  refigured,  and  depicted  as  being  materially  and  conceptually 

inextricable. What distinguishes Landform in-particular from my previous work with Waveform 

and Orbital Reveries is its deployment of sensory information not simply as a motive source 

of variation, but as constituting a structured schema that translates into specific compositional 

instructions. The landscape images are treated as executable environments in a very concrete 

sense, as being already-enfolded within the functioning of the machinic routines through which 

it is prehended, as opposed to being only visual renderings of camera data for human eyes, 

or  topographies  for  analytical  enclosure  by  machine  vision.  The  result  is  the  multiple 

interlinking  of  environments,  sensors,  software,  and  scholarly  texts  to  generate  a  highly 

distributed,  contingent  assembly  of  energies  and  materials  that  renders  the  world  in  ways 

significantly  removed  from  the  utilitarian,  regimenting  imperatives  associated  with  extent 

sensory  regimes  of  automated  data  gathering  and  processing,  or,  indeed,  the  frequently 

delimited modes of expression that typify academic knowledge-making. These dynamics have 

a hand in the perils of the present moment, and their refiguration, I venture, shall become ever 

more necessary as the worldly formations on which their stability is predicated start to unravel 

and transform in increasingly unpredictable ways. 

 

As  highlighted  throughout  this  discussion,  the  creative  and  critical  potential  of 

speculative  digital  art  is  not  necessarily  to  be  found  in  its  articulation  of  explicit  messages 

concerning the current state and future implications of the contemporary environment, as to 

offer  suggestive  conjunctions  of  technology,  discourse,  and  form  that  denaturalise  and 

reformulate existing structures and processes. The hazards here, of course, are its reliance 

on an onlooking audience being willing to think across these elements, and to understand the 

creative  and  critical  gesture  at  work  as  much  in  terms  of  its  enabling  processes  as  the 

outcomes  generated—and,  for  the  latter,  a  disposition  to  view  them  outside  the  genre 

categories  within  which  they  might  be  associated  or  confined.  However,  on  this  point,  the 

seemingly ‘alien’ character of such work presents its own interpretative challenges, and the 

intended qualities of the artworks outlined in this paper do not necessarily become apparent 

when their outputs are viewed in isolation. Nevertheless, I would forward that the potential for 

such  interpretative  aporia  is  not  necessarily  a  failing,  for  the  goal  of  speculative  work,  as 

mentioned  previously,  is  not  the  production  of  delimited  narratives  and  defined  points 

reflection,  but  to  catalyse  further  creative  vectors  of  intrigue  and  enquiry.  To  borrow  the 

evocative  phrase  of  author  Michael  Joyce  (1988),  when  characterising  the  hypertextual 

beginnings of electronic literature, these speculative platforms, I venture, represent ‘versions 

of  what  they  are  becoming:  a  structure  for  what  does  not  yet  exist’,  and  so  are  a  means 

towards not the realisation of definitive answers, but for instigating and developing ongoing 

conversations  around  how  ecology,  technology,  and  knowledge-making  facilitate  specific 

modes of  being in the world, while,  by the same turn,  affording the potential for other such 

ways of living and understanding. It is these conversations that are the foundation of my artistic 

and academic practice thus far, and it is a privilege to explore where they may yet lead. 

 

References 

 

Agre, P. (1997) Toward a Critical Technical Practice: Lessons Learned in Trying to Reform 

AI. Available at: https://pages.gseis.ucla.edu/faculty/agre/critical.html (Accessed: 1 May 

2021). 

 

Barad, K. (2003) ‘Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an Understanding of How Matter 

Comes to Matter’, Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 28(3), pp. 801-831. doi: 

https://doi.org/10.1086/345321. 

 

Carpenter, J.R. (2016) The Gathering Cloud. Available at: 

http://luckysoap.com/thegatheringcloud/ (Accessed: 1 May 2021). 

Carpenter, J.R. (2018) This is a Picture of Wind: A Weather Poem for Phones. Available at: 

http://luckysoap.com/apictureofwind/ (Accessed: 1 May 2021). 

 

Carpenter, J.R. (2019) The Pleasure of the Coast. Available at: 

http://luckysoap.com/pleasurecoast/ (Accessed: 1 May 2021). 

 

Carter, R. (2018) ‘Waves to Waveforms: Performing the Thresholds of Sensing and Sense-

Making in the Anthropocene’, Arts 7(4). doi: 10.3390/arts7040070. 

 

Carter, R. (2021) Orbital Reveries. Available at: http://richardacarter.com/orbital-reveries/ 

(Accessed: 1 May 2021). 

 

Chwałczyk, F. (2020) ‘Around the Anthropocene in Eighty Names—Considering the 

Urbanocene Proposition’, Sustainability 12(11). doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/su12114458. 

 

Edwards, D. (2020) ‘Digital Rhetoric on a Damaged Planet: Storying Digital Damage as 

Inventive Response to the Anthropocene’, Rhetoric Review, 39(1), pp. 59-72. doi: 

10.1080/07350198.2019.1690372. 

 

Engelmann, S. (2021) ‘Geopoetics: On Organising, Mourning, and the Incalculable’, Dialogues 

in Human Geography, 11(1). doi: https://doi.org/10.1177/2043820620986398. 

 

Jones, N. (2020) ‘Distributed Critique: Critical New Media Art as a Research Environment for 

the  Post-Humanities’,  Parse,  12.  Available  at:  https://parsejournal.com/article/distributed-

critique-critical-new-media-art-as-a-research-environment-for-the-post-humanities/ 

(Accessed: 1 May 2021). 

 

Joyce, M. (1988) Siren Shapes: Exploratory and Constructive Hypertexts, in Wadrip-Fruin, N. 

and Montfort, N. (eds.) The New Media Reader. Cambridge, M.A.: The MIT Press, pp. 614-

624. 

 

Naji, J. (2021) Digital Poetry. Palgrave Macmillan. 

 

Parikka, J. (2015) ‘Mutating Media Ecologies’, continent, 4(2), pp. 24-32. Available at: 

https://web.archive.org/web/20200712170215/http://continentcontinent.cc/index.php/contine

nt/article/view/183 (Accessed: 1 May 2021). 

 

Raley, R. (2011) ‘The Ecological Turn in Contemporary Digital Poetics’, Contemporary 

Literature, 52(4), pp. 883-912. Available at: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41472497 

(Accessed: 1 May 2021). 

 

Tisselli,  E.  (2021)  ‘The  Gate:  A  Game-Essay  on  Coexistence  and  Spectrality  in  the 

Anthropocene’, The Digital Review, 0. doi: https://doi.org/10.7273/g4jb-3d52. 

