From ‘Cinema Envy’ to Social Media Envy? The Changing Face of Videogame 
Characterisation in the Age of Platformisation  
 
Rob Gallagher, University of East Anglia 
 
 
Introduction 
It was in Summer 2020 that the aspiring musician Seraphine began building a following on 
Twitter, Instagram and Soundcloud. With her candyfloss-pink hair, her outsized vintage 
spectacles and her pet cat Bao, Seraphine was well-versed in the aesthetics of the ‘Instagirl’ 
(Maguire). Her posts ran the gamut from dreamy musings to goofy selfies, with the 
occasional shots of handwritten journal entries confessing her creative misgivings and 
feelings of self-doubt. A paragon of ‘popular feminis[t]… ambivalence’ (Banet-Weiser 5), 
Seraphine would caption shots of herself in a bikini with reflections on her fluctuating self-
esteem and the vicissitudes of personal growth. None of which is unusual for a social media 
influencer. More unusual was the fact that Seraphine was a fictional character, a computer-
generated facsimile of an Instagirl. Between July 2020 and December 2021, her social media 
posts fleshed out this character’s personality while sketching an aspirational narrative about a 
plucky musician leaving her day job to pursue her dreams. Theories about who was behind 
the character were already circulating when Seraphine posted a cover version of the song 
Pop/Stars by K/DA, a virtual girl group comprising characters from Riot Games’ hugely 
popular ‘multiplayer online battle arena’ League of Legends (Riot Games 2009). In 
September Riot confirmed that Seraphine was joining the game’s roster of playable 
‘champions’.  
 
In many ways Riot’s transmedia experiment was a success: Seraphine accrued hundreds of 
thousands of followers, racked up millions of listens on Spotify, and inspired a raft of fanart, 
some of which she shared on Twitter. But her introduction was also controversial. Some 
League players saw Seraphine as an instance of Riot - an American company that has been 
owned by Chinese technology giant TenCent since 2011 - being forced ‘to support [sic] the 
ULGY [sic] asian gaming culture full of whimsical creatures and cuttie [sic] nerdy beings’ 
(Kostas Pantadis); others derisively accused Seraphine of looking like an ‘e-girl’, a ‘tik toker’ 
or something from ‘a 17yo girl's deviantart’, rejecting the character as a craven bid ‘to appeal 
to female players’ (Aceraxe Blade; Luka Tatomirov; Shot040; emilytchuu). Many fans 
remarked on Seraphine’s resemblance to Belle Delphine, the pink-haired model and vlogger 
who sparked a lucrative controversy in 2019 by listing jars of ‘GamerGirl Bath Water’ for 
sale on her online store (Dickson).  
 
Such comments betray signs of “hardcore” gaming culture’s sense of itself as ‘under attack’ 
and in need of ‘defense… against “others”’ who fail to fit the gamer archetype of the white 
male geek (Salter and Blodgett 77). They speak to tensions between the ‘face culture’ of sites 
like Instagram and the ‘mask culture’ that prevails on anonymous messageboards and in 
avatar-based virtual worlds (Zeeuw and Tuters 214) – and to gaming culture’s status as a key 
front in an ongoing culture war between the ‘deeply entwined’ forces of ‘popular misogyny 
and popular feminism’ (Banet-Weiser 2). But these fans were not alone in taking exception to 
Seraphine. For journalist Gita Jackson (2020) the character’s calculated bids for ‘relatability’, 
Riot’s portrayal of her mental health issues, and the narrative of a young woman quitting her 
dead-end job to become a star were ‘perverse’ and ‘offensive’ – especially against the 
backdrop of a worsening pandemic. The controversy intensified when, in a Medium post 
published in November, Stephanie Dorris (2020) recounted her ‘brief relationship with a Riot 

 

1 

employee’ and outlined her belief that the company had essentially plagiarised her online 
persona to create Seraphine, a character who ‘looks like me, and talks like me, and sounds 
like me, and draws like me’. As part of her case Dorris juxtaposed images from Seraphine’s 
feeds with her own social media posts, highlighting similar situations, poses and 
compositions. Riot hit back with a statement insisting that Seraphine was ‘not based on any 
individual’ and asserting that Dorris’ ‘claim lacks merit’ (Haasch 2020).  

Whether or not Riot was taking direct inspiration from Dorris’ output, or from that of Belle 
Delphine, their approach was undeniably informed by ‘self-branding’ strategies (Duffy and 
Hund 2015) and ‘small storytelling’ techniques (Georgakopoulou 2016) pioneered by young 
female users of social media platfoms. Riot are hardly the first to have adapted these 
techniques to fiction: artist Amalia Ulman’s Instagram series Excellences and Perfections 
(2016) has already been canonised for its use of the photo-sharing platform to spin a pseudo-
autobiographical narrative, one that Maguire argues is best understood less as a ‘hoax’ than a 
meditation on the ‘public demand for images of young women and girls’ and the ‘tropes and 
conventions’ that women deploy online ‘in order to be recognised as a brand worth investing 
in’ (28-9). Seraphine also has a high-profile precursor in transmedia studio Brüd’s Lil 
Miquela, a virtual model, popstar and influencer whose posts portray her getting to grips with 
the revelation that she is a ‘robot’ created to serve commercial imperatives (Drenten and 
Brooks). This paper begins by considering the contexts from which such forms of 
characterisation and storytelling have emerged, showing how they reflect the logics of 
networked platforms. The following section turns to the videogame industry. Arguing that 
changes in how games are distributed, monetised, accessed and promoted are informing 
approaches to storytelling and characterisation among game developers, it posits a shift away 
from cinema and towards social media as a source of inspiration. Finally, the paper argues 
that Seraphine’s story is noteworthy not only for what it tells us about emerging forms of 
digital fiction and the changing dynamics of the media industries, but for what it suggests 
about the impact of ‘platform capitalism’ on understandings of identity, subjectivity and 
sociability (Srnicek 2017).   

Fictionalising the Influencer 
For Georgakoupoulou the design of social media platforms ‘encourages the sharing of 
everyday life as stories, as a branded directive of living and telling, of sharing-life-in-the 
moment’ (“Sharing the Moment” 107). As she readily concedes, these ‘stories’ do not 
necessarily fit conventional narratological definitions of that term – which tend to presume 
that a ‘story’ is a retrospective narrative, related by a single teller, describing a sequence of 
events with a beginning, middle and end (“Small Stories Research” 20-21). The ‘small 
stories’ shared by social media users, by contrast, often take the form of ongoing updates and 
flashes of ‘breaking news’ that capture events in the process of unfolding, and that other 
users may contribute to as co-tellers by replying, commenting, linking or otherwise adding 
their perspective (“Storytelling on the Go”).  
 
The potential for small stories to reach huge audiences online has fuelled the phenomenon of 
‘microcelebrity’ - ‘a mind-set and a collection of self-presentation practices endemic in social 
media, in which users strategically formulate a profile, reach out to followers, and reveal 
personal information to increase attention and thus improve their online status’ (Marwick 
138). The social media ecosystem also ‘rewards, via the logic of its metrics’, users who are 
willing to open up the intimate spaces of their homes to strangers, turning locations 
‘previously conceptualised as private and safe from judgement’ into zones of ‘public 
visibility, surveillance and evaluation’ (Kennedy 1070). Instagram and TikTok, in particular, 

 

2 

have catered to a seemingly insatiable popular appetite for what Kennedy calls the ‘viral 
spectacle of girls bedroom culture’ (idem.). If ‘the bedroom has long been understood as a 
central organising space for the leisure, same-sex friendships, expression of sexual desire, 
and creative and playful production for girls in Western culture’, these platforms have turned 
it into a site of content creation too (ibid. 1071). While this transformation can be rewarding - 
yielding approval, social connections, and (for some users at least) opportunities to monetise 
one’s fame - it is not without ‘risk’ (idem.). The risks are exacerbated by the dynamics of 
algorithmic curation, which incentivise would-be microcelebrities to court controversy in 
search of greater visibility. While attention-grabbing stunts can draw clicks, likes and 
subscriptions, they can also backfire, with consequences both for individual influencers and 
for the brands and platforms seeking to capitalise on their popularity. Belle Delphine has 
periodically been banned from Instagram and YouTube for posting content judged to 
contravene the platforms’ adult content policies, while gaming streamer Felix ‘PewDiePie’ 
Kjellberg was spectacularly dropped by Disney after the corporation was alerted to his habit 
of posting ‘anti-Semitic jokes [and] Nazi imagery’ by journalists from the Wall Street 
Journal (Winkler, Nikas and Fritz). 
 
In such a climate it is easy to see why ‘virtual influencers’ might appeal to brands. Putatively 
tweeting from the bedroom depicted in many of her selfies, Seraphine asserts ‘i made 
mistakes, and everyone saw. and you know what? that’s okay’ (@seradotwav). But of course, 
the very point of virtual influencers is that they do not make mistakes: for all they might post 
about their ‘insecurities… and vulnerabilities’ these characters will ‘never be fallible’ in the 
way their flesh and blood counterparts are, because their every move has been scripted in 
advance by teams of professionals (Drenten and Brooks 3). And it is not just marketers who 
have been drawn to these forms of characterisation and storytelling. Game developers, too, 
are taking cues – a development that is not insignificant for a medium that has in the past 
often looked to film for narrative templates. 
 
From Ellie to Seraphine? 
In the early 2000s the designer and theorist Eric Zimmerman diagnosed the videogame 
industry as suffering from a serious case of ‘cinema envy’ (145). At the time critics were in 
raptures over Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty, an interactive espionage thriller full of 
nods to action films, directed by ardent cinephile Hideo Kojima and scored by Hollywood 
veteran Harry Gregson Williams. The same year had seen Core Design’s Tomb Raider – 
starring a character initially imagined as a ‘female Indiana Jones’ (Kline, Dyer-Witheford and 
Peuter 236) - adapted into a big screen summer blockbuster. While many scholars joined 
Zimmerman in arguing that attempts to marry interactivity with cinematic storytelling were 
misguided, and risked compromising the very qualities that made digital games unique, it 
seemed reasonable at the time to suppose that videogame designers would continue to draw 
on cinema for inspiration. 
 
Some two decades later these predictions have largely been borne out. Certainly, the success 
of games like The Last of Us Part II (Naughty Dog 2020) would suggest that gaming culture 
has yet to shake its case of ‘cinema envy’. Naughty Dog’s blockbuster sequel boasts near-
photorealistic graphics and uses state-of-the-art performance capture techniques, ensuring 
that it often looks like a film. Its approach to plotting and characterisation is also steeped in 
Hollywood conventions, and entails subjecting protagonist Ellie to a series of deadly trials 
and dramatic tests of character set in motion by a shocking inciting incident. Ellie is 
profoundly changed by what she undergoes, in ways that proved highly contentious among 
fans of the first game. But while The Last of Us Part II was one of the best-selling releases of 

 

3 

2020, as a story-led singleplayer console game it is also a specimen of what many consider a 
dying breed – a breed poorly adapted for the media landscape that platform capitalism is 
bringing into being.   

As I have argued elsewhere, while ‘in the 1990s, the holy grail for much of the industry was 
the videogame as “interactive movie”, today publishers tend to be more interested in 
understanding games as “platforms” upon which fan communities, advertising campaigns, 
data mining routines, digital rights management infrastructures, and downloadable content 
markets can be built’ (174). As a free-to-play online multiplayer game League of Legends 
illustrates this shift. Rather than asking players to purchase the title up-front via a single 
payment, Riot has made League available as a free download, generating money through the 
sale of characters and costumes (known as ‘skins’). While the game boasts a formidable body 
of lore, the point is not, as in Tomb Raider or Metal Gear Solid II, for players to work their 
way through a linear story. As a multiplayer game, League is about forming teams and 
competing with rivals, with players honing their skills and strategies across countless matches 
that are always broadly similar and always slightly different. Rather than releasing sequels, 
Riot constantly tunes, tweaks and augments the game, refining mechanics, rebalancing 
values, and adding costumes and characters.  

Of course, a multiplayer game only works if there are people to play against. And it only 
remains viable for Riot if players are continuing to spend money (and generate data). With 
increasing numbers of free-to-play games competing for the time and attention of potential 
players, moreover, the battle for mindshare has become its own savage metagame – one to 
which fans are expected to contribute by sharing screengrabs, memes, videos and artwork on 
social media. In such a context storytelling per se becomes less important than the 
development of compelling ‘storyworlds’ and of appealing, instantly recognisable characters 
(Ryan). This shift in emphasis, it should be noted, predates the advent of online platforms. In 
the 1990s Hiroki Azuma was already positing a move away from plot and towards character 
in Japanese popular media, arguing that Japan’s ‘media mix’ environment privileged 
characters who could evoke powerful feelings of attachment, characters who could easily be 
displaced from their original contexts and dropped into new ones, from ‘light novels, live-
action feature films, television series, magazine specials and other popular narrative forms’ to 
‘figurines, plush toys, lunch boxes, backpacks, clothing, and whatever other items can 
possibly be purchased to enrich one’s everyday life with reminders of a favourite series’ 
(Hutchinson 2). Platformisation has only accelerated this shift.   

In such a media environment the qualities that critics have traditionally tended to praise in 
novelistic and filmic characters – psychological depth and complexity, a dramatic 
developmental arc – can become liabilities, impeding a character’s legibility, mobility and 
malleability. Across the two Last of Us games Ellie follows a trajectory from innocence to 
experience, from happiness to loss to a thirst for vengeance and a realisation of the ultimate 
emptiness of revenge. While we may dispute how effectively Naughty Dog spins this tale, 
theirs remains an essentially classical approach to characterisation and plotting, one in which 
‘character is a function of narrative structure’, just as Aristotle decreed (Frow 6). Ellie exists 
to enact her arc, and is left irrevocably changed by what she witnesses and does. In some 
sense it is pointless to ask who she would be or how she would behave in other 
circumstances. This fact, however, has not stopped the merchandising bandwagon - it is still 
possible, for example, to buy a bobbleheaded Funko Pop! doll of the character. Ellie’s 
abstraction into an adorably saucer-eyed caricature of herself, however, underlines just how 
ill-suited she is to this kind of recontextualization, in terms both of her personality and her 

 

4 

visual design. With her nondescript grey clothing and her brown shoulder length hair, the 
mutedly androgynous Ellie could be anyone. By comparison, Seraphine – with her pink, blue 
and purple palette and the blue star under her left eye - is easy to recognise in even the most 
amateurish fan art (and, for that matter, in the character’s own notepad doodles of herself). 
To put this in the terms used by Japanese critics, Ellie may succeed as a kyarakuta - ‘a 
fictitious being represented to exist within a diegetic domain’ - but she fares less well as a 
kyara - ‘a stylized or simplified visual figuration that can be easily reproduced or consumed 
outside its original narrative context’ (Wilde). 
 
League is now a burgeoning transmedia property, with its own Netflix show in development. 
But Riot has long presented the game as a multiverse in its own right, framing each character 
‘skin’ as another version of that character, belonging to their own alternate reality. Thus 
Seraphine can be a trainee mage from a steampunk fantasy city and an everyday girl posting 
selfies from her nondescript bedroom. Both versions of the character share the same key 
personality traits and visual signifiers, ensuring consistency across media, storyworlds and 
plotlines. Characters like Seraphine are conceived from the get-go as ‘transmedia figures’, 
ripe for reinvention and reimagining (Thon 181). Even across the small stories that were 
posted to her social media accounts, some representations tend towards the immediacy of the 
kyara while others that aim to evoke the depth and complexity of the kyaratura. As gaming is 
reshaped by platformisation, and as developers like Riot continue to pursue business models 
that presume players will build gameplay into their everyday routines over periods of years, 
such approaches to storytelling and characterisation will only become more common. 
 
Personhood Under Platformisation 
Near the start of the sequence of Instagram posts that served as her introduction to the word, 
Seraphine acquires a polaroid camera. Several of her subsequent posts are presented as digital 
photos of physical snapshots, captioned in marker pen. Others purport to be Seraphine’s shots 
of family photographs of herself as a toddler, with her hand (complete with elaborately 
decorated thumbnail) visible in frame holding the physical print. The images of Seraphine’s 
journal entries likewise strive to convey a sense of materiality and hapticity: pages are coffee-
stained, collaged, and have origami cranes crushed between them; notes and doodles are 
messily crossed out or underlined. One of her posts presents a cork pinboard, onto which 
Seraphine has seemingly pinned printouts of inspirational tweets from fans. While these 
images do not necessarily tell stories, they perform a range of other functions: lending this 
immaterial being a sense of fleshly substantiality, hinting at a biography that predates her 
appearance online, and acknowledging fans’ engagements with the character, they also 
playfully foreground the gap between fiction and fact, the virtual and the physical, 
representation sand reality. 
 
As Drenten and Brooks note in their account of Lil’ Miquela, it would be a mistake simply to 
see virtual influencers as ersatz approximations of real (micro)celebrities. The celebrity’s star 
image has always been a ‘fabricat[ion]’ in which a range of ‘cultural intermediaries’ have had 
a hand; and while influencers might be appealing because they seem more relatable and 
accessible than popstars or Hollywood celebrities, there is still an acknowledgement among 
fans and followers that this authenticity is at least partly a performance – and that, in an age 
of ‘photoshopping, filtering… and digital[] editing’, no one is quite as they appear online (3-
4). Given this it is hard to know whether we should be surprised that some fans concluded 
there was a real person more-or-less literally behind the Seraphine they saw on screen: in a 
thread from August 2020 one Twitter user writes ‘the images she posts are drawings on top 
of photos of a real person. I’m guessing the person behind the photos and managing the 

 

5 

account is the same…. The real person speaks through a filter, but what is spoken is more or 
less their real thoughts and feelings. But yeah it might be just 100% roleplay’ 
(@CopoDeCiveta). 
 
As this suggests, the Seraphine affair is not just a story about videogame characterisation, or 
the functions that fictional characters are assuming in entertainment ecosystems being 
reshaped by platformisation. John Frow proposes that rather than understanding ‘fictional 
characters as somewhat similar to persons’ we should instead treat ‘persons as somewhat 
similar to fictional characters’ – a stance that ‘allows us to understand persons not as 
ontological givens, but as constructs, which are in part made out of the same material as 
fictional characters’ (vii). Studying fictional characters can, Frow contends, help us to 
understand ‘how social personhood works as a kind of fiction’ (vii). Seraphine brings us face 
to face with the extent to which plaftforms have already reshaped storytelling, self-
presentation, sociability and even subjectivity itself, reframing personhood through the lens 
of platformisation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

6 

 
 
 
 
Works Cited 
Aceraxe Blade. Comment on “Seraphine Champion Spotlight.” YouTube, 2020. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hiNN2WKkR3Q&ab_channel=LeagueofLegends 

Azuma, Hiroki. Otaku: Japan’s Database Animals. Translated by Jonatan E. Abel and Shio 

Kono University of Minnesota Press, 2009. 

Banet-Weiser, Sarah. Empowered: Popular Feminism and Popular Misogyny. Duke 

university Press, 2018. 

@CopoDeCiveta. “I think the text is more about the real person.” Twitter, 21 August 2020, 

1:27PM. https://twitter.com/CopoDeCiveta/status/1296785950572449798 

Dickson, EJ. “Belle Delphine: Is Bathwater Gamer Girl the Greatest Internet Troll?” Rolling 

Stone’, 11 July 2019. https://www.rollingstone.com/culture/culture-features/belle-
delphine-bathwater-gamer-girl-troll-857192/. 

Drenten, Jenna, and Gillian Brooks. “Celebrity 2.0: Lil Miquela and the Rise of a Virtual Star 

System”. Feminist Media Studies, vol. 20, no.8, 2020, pp.1319–23. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/14680777.2020.1830927.  

Duffy, Brooke Erin, and Emily Hund. “‘Having It All’ on Social Media: Entrepreneurial 

Femininity and Self-Branding Among Fashion Bloggers”. Social Media + Society, 
vol. 1, no. 2, Sept. 2015, pp.1-11. 

Emilytchuu. Comment on “Seraphine Champion Spotlight.” YouTube, 2021. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hiNN2WKkR3Q&ab_channel=LeagueofLegends 

Frow, John. Character and Person. Oxford University Press, 2014. 
Gallagher, Rob. “Plotting the Loop: Videogames and Narratability”. The Edinburgh 

Companion to Contemporary Narrative Theories, edited by Zara Dinnen and Robyn 
R. Warhol, Edinburgh University Press, 2018, pp.174–86. 

Georgakopoulou, Alexandra. “Small Stories Research and Social Media Practices: Narrative 
Stancetaking and Circulation in a Greek News Story”. Sociolinguistica, vol. 27, 2013, 
pp.19–36. 

———. “Storytelling on the Go: Breaking News as a Travelling Narrative Genre”. The  
Travelling Concepts of Narrative, edited by Matti Hyvärinen, Mari Hatavara, and Lars-

Christer Hydén, John Benjamins, 2013, pp. 201–24. 

———. “From Narrating the Self to Posting Self(ies): A Small Stories Approach to Selfies”. 

Open Linguistics, vol.2, no.1, 2016, 300-317. 

———. “Sharing the Moment as Small Stories”. Storytelling in the Digital World, edited by 

Anna De Fina and Sabina Perrino, John Benjamins, 2019, pp.105–28.. 

Haasch, Palmer. “Riot Games Denied a Woman’s Claim That Her Image Was Used without 

Consent for a League of Legends Character”. Insider, 13 November 2020. 
https://www.insider.com/seraphine-allegations-riot-games-denies-similarities-
stephanie-2020-11.  

Hutchinson, Rachael. Japanese Culture through Videogames. Routledge, 2019. 
Jackson, Gita. “League of Legends’ Fake Anime Pop Star Is Sad Tweeting About Genocide”. 

Vice, 15 October 2021, https://www.vice.com/en/article/dy8g87/league-of-legends-
fake-anime-pop-star-is-sad-tweeting-about-genocide. 

Kennedy, Melanie. ‘“If the Rise of the TikTok Dance and e-Girl Aesthetic Has Taught Us 
Anything, It’s That Teenage Girls Rule the Internet Right Now’: TikTok Celebrity, 
Girls and the Coronavirus Crisis”. European Journal of Cultural Studies, vol.23, no.6, 
2020. Pp.1069–76.  

 

7 

Luka Tatomirov. Comment on “Seraphine Champion Spotlight.” YouTube, 2021. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hiNN2WKkR3Q&ab_channel=LeagueofLegends 

Kline, Stephen, Nick Dyer-Witheford and Greig de Peuter. Digital Play: The Interaction of 

Technology, Culture, and Marketing. McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2003.  

Kostas Pantadis. Comment on “Seraphine Champion Spotlight.” YouTube, 2021. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hiNN2WKkR3Q&ab_channel=LeagueofLegends 

The Last of Us: Part II. Naughty Dog, 2020. 
League of Legends. Riot Games, 2009. 
Maguire, Emma. “Constructing the ‘Instagirl,’ Deconstructing the Self-Brand: Amalia 

Ulman’s Instagram Hoax”. European Journal of Life Writing vol.8, 2019, pp.12–32. 
https://doi.org/10.21827/ejlw.8.35546. 

Marwick, Alice E. “Instafame: Luxury Selfies in the Attention Economy”. Public Culture, 

vol.27, no.1 75, 2015, pp.137–60.  

Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty. Konami Computer Entertainment Japan, 2001. 
Ryan, Marie-Laure. “Story/Worlds/Media”. Storyworlds across Media: Toward a Media-

Conscious Narratology, edited by Marie-Laure Ryan and Thon, Jan-Noël. University 
of Nebraska Press, 2014, pp.1-22. 

@seradotwav. “I had to learn some hard lessons”. Twitter, 6 November 2020,  11:30PM. 

https://twitter.com/seradotwav/status/1324494231088496641 

Salter, Anastasia, and Bridget Blodgett. Toxic Geek Masculinity in Media. Springer 

International, 2017.  

Shot040. Comment on “Seraphine Champion Spotlight.” YouTube, 2020. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hiNN2WKkR3Q&ab_channel=LeagueofLegends 

Srnicek, Nick. Platform Capitalism. Polity, 2017. 
Stephanie. “The Problem with Seraphine”. Medium. 12 November 2020. https://step-

nie.medium.com/the-problem-with-seraphine-58dc16c07e79. 

Thon, Jan-Noël. “transmedia Characters: Theory and Analysis”. Frontiers of Narrative 

Studies, vol.5, no.2, 2019, pp.176-199. 

Tomb Raider. Core Design, 1996. 
Ulman, Amalia. Excellences and Perfections, 2016. 
Wilde, Lukas R.A. “Recontextualizing Characters. Media Convergence and Pre-/Meta- 

Narrative Character Circulation”. Image 29, 2019, pp.3-21. 

Winkler, Fritz, Rolfe Winkler, Jack Nicas and Ben. “Disney Severs Ties With YouTube Star 

PewDiePie After Anti-Semitic Posts”. Wall Street Journal, 14 Feb. 2017. 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/disney-severs-ties-with-youtube-star-pewdiepie-after-
anti-semitic-posts-1487034533. 

Zeeuw, Daniël de, and Marc Tuters. “‘Teh Internet Is Serious Business’: On the Deep 

Vernacular Web and Its Discontents”. Cultural Politics, vol.16, no.2, 2020, pp.214–
32.  

Zimmerman, Eric. “Do Independent Videogames Exist?”. Game on: The History and Culture 

of Videogames, edited by King, Lucien. Laurence King, 2002. 

 
 

 

8 

