Sarah Thorne 
Memorial University of Newfoundland 

Paper or Pixel: Revisiting Geoff Ryman’s 253 

 

Introduction 
It is now 25 years since Geoff Ryman released 253: Or Tube Theatre (1996), a novel that uses 
hypertext linking to set the stage for a fictitious story about the crash of a London Underground 
train. The website that hosted the novel, however, has unfortunately since been lost. According to 
the Internet Archive’s Wayback Machine and corroborated by websites that maintain records of 
domains and their owners, Ryman’s ownership of the website ended in 2018 (whoxy). The 
domain appears to have been taken over by domain squatters and, at the time of writing, the site 
now contains articles about Ryman and his work, but its links redirect users to dubious sites. The 
original novel, however, remains accessible through the Wayback Machine, which last produced 
a snapshot of the novel on August 5th, 2017.  
 
Schrimpf 2008); speaking specifically about Ryman’s 253 (prior to its disappearance), Tom Abba 
writes, 

The challenges of preserving digital literature are well-known (Abba 2012, Dene 2018, 

Amongst the earliest examples of standalone hypertext writing (as distinct from 
commercially constructed hypertext packages) Geoff Ryman’s 253 (Ryman, 1997) is 
captured as a crawled archive by Wayback and referenced (but not archived in its own 
right) within UK Web Archive content, but not curated in any cogent manner. That 
Ryman’s own website remains online is of considerable value to researchers; however, 
relying on the ongoing largesse of a single author facing annual hosting fees for a work 
that brings in no revenue in itself is a dangerous policy for the digital writing community 
to pursue (121-122). 

Writing in 2012, Abba is cognizant of the fact that 253 will not remain accessible indefinitely. 
Though internet archiving sites provide an important repository for works that can no longer be 
hosted by their authors, there are limitations to these services, and they are also not immune to 
the very challenges faced by the authors of the works that they archive. These challenges are 
compounded by the imminent disappearance of crucial software needed to access digital works; 
such as the discontinued support for Flash Player (Adobe) and 32-bit programs (Apple). There 
are also legal obstacles, related to intellectual property and copyright, to attempts to preserve 
digital works, as a recent lawsuit against the Internet Archive reveals. In the lawsuit launched by 
major book publishers, the Internet Archive was charged with accusations of piracy for its 
National Emergency Library, a resource intended for those who lost access to public libraries 
during the COVID-19 pandemic (Dwyer). While such projects may skirt the rules of copyright, 
without efforts to preserve digital works, many risk disappearing altogether. 253, notable for its 
release as both a digital and print novel (copies of which are now also difficult to locate), ought 
to be preserved to capture a moment in time where thinking about print and digital textuality was 
developing. In analyzing 253, this article makes a case for its continued relevance to discussions 
of interactivity and our enjoyment of texts across different platforms. 

It is now a common practice to make a text available in multiple formats — one might 

 
even expect to receive a digital edition with the purchase of a print text. Many view the choice of 
a print or e-book as a preference. One’s reasons for choosing a print version might be the tactile 
experience, its superior viewing in direct sun, or that it is free of the distractions associated with 
one’s digital devices. Conversely, one might instead choose an e-book because of the ability to 
search the text quickly, look up words, and add detailed notes. Despite such preferences, it is 
often taken for granted that an ebook and print edition are fundamentally the same text; in the 
mid-1990s, however, the two versions of 253 were not viewed as such. As I observed while 
teaching 253 in the last year in an introductory English course, many students were bewildered 
by the idea of comparing these two seemingly identical texts. Yet, much like 253’s reviewers, 
students were quick to express their dislike of the print version. This anecdote highlights 253’s 
ability to defamiliarize audiences’ thinking about media platforms. It compels readers to 
reexamine their enjoyment of print and digital media. Unpacking the divisive reactions to 253 
through Jacques Lacan’s theory of the gaze provides insight into readers’ enjoyment of its 
voyeuristic narrative. The change in platform, as I argue, not only alters the text’s signification 
(Grossman 1997), but also the voyeuristic fantasy staged by its narrative that promises to permit 
readers to peer into the lives of the strangers around them. 

A Novel for the Internet 
Ryman’s 253: or Tube Theatre, set on a London Underground train, is divided into seven 
sections, one for each of the train’s cars. These sections are further subdivided into single-page 
passages, one for each of the 252 passengers and the driver. Passages consists of a 253-word 
description that details each passenger’s outward appearance, background information, and what 
each is doing or thinking in the moments before the crash. These descriptions contain links that 
allow readers to explore connections between passengers; however, readers are free to use the 
website’s Journey Planner to freely explore the trains cars, including the fate of their passengers, 
which is detailed in the novel’s final seven pages. 
Two years after its release, a print version of the novel was published under the title 253: 
 
The Print Remix (1998), which maintains the same structure, but uses an index at the back of the 
book to mimic the hyperlinks used in the original. Although the two texts are otherwise identical, 
they were not equally reviewed by their readers. Many found that The Print Remix fell flat. In 
“Hypertext: Foe to Print?,” Robert Kendall (2000) notes that, “though the book was generally 
well received, some reviewers complained that it suffered from the loss of its interactive 
element.” Others more harshly criticized the print version as “an example of form obliterating 
content,” while at the same time praising the hypertext version as a “curiously addictive form of 
storytelling, relying on both the illusion that the reader is shaping the story through choosing 
which links to follow, and the voyeuristic joy of finding out what people really think on the tube” 
(Mitchell). That these two texts, which share the same restrictions on form, can be viewed so 
differently provides an unusual opportunity for exploring the effects of transmediation.  
 
between novel and film is one that is “overtly compatible, [yet] secretly hostile” (198). 
Bluestone’s assertion is equally applicable to the transmediation of Ryman’s text. Although print 
and digital text appear to be inherently compatible, there is more at stake in this instance of 

In his analysis of film adaptation, George Bluestone (1997) argues that the relationship 

transmediation than a simple transposition of text. The question of what is altered and what is 
lost in the process of transmediation is essential to understanding the reactions to 253. 
In My Mother Was a Computer (2005), Katherine Hayles stresses the need to recognize 
 
hypertext and print texts as independent media (38); employing the same reading strategies to 
each would be comparable to attempting to analyze a film adaptation as though it were a novel. 
Transmediation, as Hayles argues, is translation, “which is inevitably also an act of 
interpretation” (89). This understanding of transmediation suggests that a text’s signification is 
altered in the process. Signification emerges not only from the words on the (web) page, but also 
from the text’s visual and semiotic features, such as the choice of font, size, and the inclusion of 
images, audio clips, links, and video. Thus, when such attributes differ between editions, the 
reader’s experience and interpretation of the text will consequently be altered. 
When presented with both versions of 253, there are no doubt differences in appearance; 
 
for instance, the very physical form of the print novel is vastly different than a computer screen. 
In the hypertext version, the reader views the text on a digital display, and navigates its pages 
using hyperlinks. Pages contain multiple links that may take the reader to the subsequent 
passenger, a related passenger, footnotes, or even fictional advertisements. Passengers who are 
employed by the same company, or even those who are fond of felines, are also linked. Though 
the print novel instead uses an index through which the reader can explore character links, it does 
not have the same immediacy as its hypertext counterpart: the reader must review the index, as 
the links are not apparent throughout the narrative. The index lists passengers under categories, 
such as a company name or “cats.” Jan van Looy (2003) provides an in-depth consideration of its 
structure and hypertext linking. 

Like Hayles, Ryman, too, was very much aware of the effect of transmediation on a 

reader’s interpretation of a text; as he explains: 

“253” with links is about what makes people the same, because you can follow through -- 
the grandparent theme, the people thinking about Thatcher. It’s about the subliminal ways 
we’re linked and alike. You just read it passenger by passenger, and it’s about how 
different we all are. The links change the meaning of the novel. I think I'm going to like 
the print version more because it emphasizes more just how multi-various the cars are, 
but the linked version is fun. (qtd. in Grossman) 

Yet, a change in navigation does not only alter a text’s signification, it also impacts the reader’s 
engagement with its fantasy. Contrary to its more conventional understanding, the term fantasy 
here does not imply a kind of indulgent hallucination, but rather is to be understood in the 
psychoanalytic sense as it relates to enjoyment and unconscious desire. As Slavoj Žižek explains, 
With regard to the basic opposition between reality and imagination, fantasy is not simply 
on the side of imagination; fantasy is, rather, the little piece of imagination by which we 
gain access to reality — the frame that guarantees our access to reality, our ‘sense of 
reality’ (when our fundamental fantasy is shattered, we experience the ‘loss of reality’). 
(“Possible to Traverse” 122).  

Fantasy serves a protective function that prevents one from coming too close to the object of 
desire and therefore risk losing that desire altogether. Fantasy, as Žižek writes, “is the very screen 
that separates desire from drive” (Plague 32). For readers of 253, the change in platform does not 

simply produce a dissatisfaction with one version or the other, but rather it alters the functioning 
of this protective screen: fantasy becomes distorted through transmediation. 

The Fantasy of the Voyeur 
The omniscient perspective of 253 stages the fantasy of the voyeur. As described in its 
introductory pages: 

253 is designed to appeal to the Nosey Parker in all of us. How often have you sat in a 
restaurant, theatre, or bus and wondered who the people around you are? This novel will 
give you the illusion that you can know — indeed, that you are Godlike and omniscient. 
This can be a very pleasurable sensation. But remember that, as soon as you close the 
book, you are no longer Godlike and omniscient. (Print Remix 4) 

The voyeuristic fantasy of 253 also functions in this very way; that is, the narrative 

Ryman’s text provides his readers with the illusion that they are not only able to see into each 
passenger’s personal life, but capable of knowing his or her intimate thoughts moments before 
the train crashes. In this omniscient position, the reader embodies the voyeur. The text allows the 
reader to peer into the lives of interesting passengers and to shy away from those who are less 
compelling. The text, however, is also self-reflexive, as diligent readers will come across 
passengers who are also engaged in the act of watching and, thus, caught up in the voyeuristic 
fantasy. For example, the description of Mr William Dynham (#32) states that “He enjoys 
looking at the people” (48), and in the “What is he doing or thinking” section, Mr Dynham is 
depicted as imagining fictitious lives for various other passengers based on their appearance. 
Another passenger, Mr Savi Gupta (#56) spends his time on the train “imagining what other 
passengers would look like if they had been born as the opposite sex” (84). It is this desire to 
know upon which the fantasy of the novel hinges. 
 
provides the “illusion that you can know” (4), which allows its readers to enjoy in a capacity that 
had previously been limited. Its formulaic structure provides an almost encyclopedic account of 
each passenger’s intimate thoughts and actions prior to the crash, details that would otherwise 
elude the experience of any real-life passenger interested in those nearby. Yet, the text also 
prefaces this demand with the recognition that the power it bestows is an illusion, thereby 
acknowledging its failure to actually deliver what it promises. In a certain way, however, this 
failure of the text to “tell all” is essential to the fantasy of the voyeur. As Lacan states, “What the 
voyeur is looking for and finds is merely a shadow, a shadow behind the curtain. There he will 
phantasize any magic of presence, the most graceful of girls, for example, even if on the other 
side there is only a hairy athlete” (182). The voyeur’s enjoyment depends upon the curtain 
concealing the object; in other words, the text must fail to provide a truly omniscient subject 
position in order to preserve the fantasmatic element of desire. The voyeur desires to know all 
and see all, but does not want to actually fully realize this desire: the aim of desire is not its 
fulfillment, but rather its own perpetuation, as encountering the object of desire often produces 
disappointment (Žižek, How to Read Lacan 68) and “eliminates precisely what is appealing 
about it” (McGowan 79). Ryman’s novel, however, sets out to do precisely that: to lift the curtain 
that obscures those around us. However, the digital and print version do so to different degrees.  
253 also addresses the effect that the gaze of the Nosey Parker has on those who are 
 
observed. Passengers 27 and 240, for instance, are both aware of the gaze: Mr Stuart Cowe 

(#240) realizes that “[t]he woman leaning next to him is leaning over the page. He rears back, 
snorts, and snaps the book shut” (Print Remix 326). Ms Danni Jarret (#27) who is writing a 
comedy routine and catches the woman next to her reading her work and yells at her: “You keep 
sticking that in funny places, it'll get bitten off” (42). What is most important about these specific 
interactions is that they bring attention to the fact that the gaze is not a one-way process: that is, 
the other who is being watched, also watches back. This effect is central to Lacan’s theory of the 
gaze, which is not to be confused with the term often referenced by film theorists such as Laura 
Mulvey. Lacan’s theory, by contrast, disempowers the gaze, and separates it from the act of 
looking: 

The gaze is therefore, in Lacan’s account, no longer on the side of the subject; it is the 
gaze of the Other. . . When the subject looks at an object, the object is always already 
gazing back at the subject, but from a point at which the subject cannot see it. This split 
between the eye and the gaze is nothing other than the subjective division itself, 
expressed in the field of vision. (Evans 72) 

The voyeur depends on the prohibition and obstruction of his gaze in order to derive enjoyment. 
As Žižek elaborates, the pervert is not simply one who transgresses boundaries of the Law, but 
depends upon the Law: “the pervert, this ‘transgressor’ par excellence who purports to violate all 
the rules of ‘normal’, decent behaviour, effectively longs for the very rule of the Law” (118). The 
gaze is key to the voyeuristic fantasy of 253, as it illuminates the Other’s role in this fantasy, 
particularly when the reader is abruptly reminded that he or she is also being observed by others 
as well. How this fantasy is staged, however, varies in the print and digital versions of 253. 

Interactivity & Interpassivity 
The reader’s enjoyment of Ryman’s novel, according to its reviews, relies on the interactivity 
afforded by its hyperlinks. The reader’s engagement with the work forms a kind of interpassive 
relationship with the text. The term interpassivity, coined by Robert Pfaller, describes moments 
in which one enjoys in the place of the subject: “Rather than letting others work for them, they 
let them enjoy for them. In other words, they delegate passivity to others rather than activity” (2). 
Pfaller includes Lacan’s analysis of the Chorus’ emotional reaction to events in Greek tragedies, 
and Žižek’s discussion of canned laughter in television sitcoms as examples (26). Adopting 
Pfaller’s term, Žižek theorizes two forms of interpassivity: one passive and the other active. In its 
passive form, the subject enjoys vicariously through the Other, as in the previous examples: 

I accede to the Other the passive aspect (of enjoying), while I can remain actively 
engaged—that is, I can work longer hours with less need for “nonproductive” activity, 
such as leisure or mourning. I can continue to work in the evening, while the VCR 
passively enjoys for me; I can make financial arrangements for the deceased’s fortune 
while the weepers mourn in my place. (“Will You Laugh”) 

The subject can, therefore, feel as though they have fulfilled their duty to enjoy without actually 
viewing what the VCR has recorded, producing an illusory sense of enjoyment. Consequently, 
Žižek argues, “[i]n contrast to the notion that new media turn us into passive consumers who just 
stare numbly at the screen, the real threat of new media is that they deprive us of our passivity, of 
our authentic passive experience, and thus prepare us for mindless frenetic activity—for endless 
work.” 

In its active form, however, interpassivity operates such that the subject is incessantly 

 
active in an effort to render the Other passive. This particular form of interpassivity is associated 
with obsessional neurosis. As Žižek writes, “[t]he link with obsessional neurosis is crucial for the 
notion of interpassivity, since the key problem of the obsessional neurotic is how to postpone the 
encounter with jouissance (and thus maintain the belief in its possibility).” (“Possible to 
Traverse” 108). The purpose of postponing enjoyment is to prevent one from having to accept 
that attaining jouissance is not possible; as discussed earlier, encountering the object of desire 
produces disappointment. By avoiding this acknowledgement, the obsessional neurotic can 
indulge in the fantasmatic illusion that jouissance is merely deferred. As Ian Parker argues, the 
obsessional neurotic would thus be attracted to science fiction fantasies, for “[i]n science fiction 
we project fantasies into the future and are then caught in those fantasies both because they seem 
to confirm what has always been deeply true and hidden about human nature and destiny and 
because, we believe, we will eventually meet up with the fantasies when we arrive in the future” 
(203). Like the future, jouissance always remains at an elusive distance from the present. 
 
In order to preserve the fantasy, the obsessional neurotic engages in fervent activity. As 
an example, Žižek notes the analysand who speaks endlessly at his analyst. By overly fulfilling 
the analyst’s demand for him to speak, the obsessional neurotic attempts to delay his progress in 
therapy to avoid the realization that fulfilling desire is unattainable: 

I am active precisely in order to keep the other (analyst) silent — that is, so that nothing 
will happen, so that he will not proclaim the word (or accomplish some other gesture) 
which will disclose the nullity of my incessant babble. This example shows very clearly 
how the key feature of interpassivity is that it designates not a situation in which the 
other replaces me, does something for me, but the opposite situation in which I am 
incessantly active, and sustain my activity by the other’s passivity. (“Possible to 
Traverse” 110) 

Though it may seem unusual that one who willingly submits to therapy would sabotage one’s 
own progress, the reality, as Bruce Fink explains, is that “the patient does not really want to 
change . . . The patient has a great deal invested in keeping things the way they are, for he or she 
obtains what Freud referred to as a ‘substitute satisfaction’ from symptoms, and cannot be easily 
induced to give it up” (3).  
 
Conclusion: Pixel or Paper 
The incessant activity involved in the postponement of jouissance is essential to understanding 
the reader’s interaction with the digital version of 253. While on the one hand Ryman’s text 
positions its readers as the perverse voyeur, on the other, it has the reader engaged in the 
incessant activity of clicking the links that comprise the narrative of the text. Precisely because 
253 encourages a non-linear reading, if one so chose, one could endlessly follow the various 
pathways that connect the characters without ever being certain that they had read the text in its 
entirety. However, in so doing, the reader defers its conclusion; the reader is not necessarily 
seeking its end, but is caught up in its seemingly endless web, or rather the enjoyment of one’s 
symptom. As Žižek writes, 

the hypertext rhizome does not privilege any order of reading or interpretation . . . we, 
the interactors, just have to accept that we are lost in the inconsistent complexity of 

multiple referrals and connections. . . The paradox is that this ultimate helpless 
confusion, this lack of final orientation, far from causing an unbearable anxiety, is oddly 
reassuring: the very lack of the final point of closure serves as a kind of denial which 
protects us from confronting the trauma of our finitude, of the fact that there our story 
has to end at some point — there is no ultimate irreversible point, since, in this multiple 
universe, there are always other paths to explore, alternate realities into which one can 
take refuge when one seems to reach a deadlock. (“Cyberspace Real” 6) 

Although 253 makes the details of the inevitable crash available immediately, readers do not 
have to accept these events as they are presented. The reader’s incessant clicking of links can be 
conceptualized as an attempt to postpone this inescapable tragedy; another page may only be just 
a click away that will alter the events. While this view appears to contradict J. Y. Douglas’ claim 
that “[p]art of the pleasure in reading is tied up with an ending . . . it all ends, satisfying some 
longing or curiosity within us and freeing us to pursue other things” (89). However, the 
obsessional neurotic’s desire is dependent on the existence of an ending; their activity serves to 
both preserve the fantasy that there is more to learn about the train’s passengers and to defer the 
ending to avoid disappointment. 
In The Print Remix, however, fantasy cannot be sustained through incessant activity —
 
the protective screen is removed. Although readers of The Print Remix are certainly free to flip 
randomly throughout the novel, the effect is not equal to the experience of navigating the links of 
the hypertext version. The loss of hyperlinking does not simply make this version less enjoyable 
to readers, but removes the security that the obsessional neurotic experiences in their incessant 
activity. The print version cannot support the illusion that the links are endlessly intertwined, as 
the entirety of the text is in plain view; the reader can know all there is to know. Like the 
disruption of the voyeur’s desire to see all, readers’ dissatisfaction with the print version of 253 
becomes all the more clear: with the whole text in view, there is no surplus that escapes one’s 
grasp. 
 
read in public or in private) is also significant to understanding the staging of the novel’s fantasy. 
In public, the reader would be subject to the gaze of others. Key to the Lacanian gaze is that it 
emerges in instances in which one is struck by a sudden awareness of the Other staring back, 
much like passengers 27 and 240, which serve to destabilize the voyeur’s fantasy and force the 
reader to acknowledge that those around might be engaged in a similar activity. 
 
reading the novel on public transit, this version also adds an additional dimension from which 
one recognizes the gaze of the Other, as its presence on a digital device calls attention to the fact 
that we are constantly being surveilled by our devices — a reality that has only grown to be more 
true over the past two decades. As Laura Colombino writes, although 253 is optimistic about the 
future of the web, it “reflects how, in the mid-1990s new economy and Internet euphoria, the 
web ‘was emblematic of both control and freedom, the apotheosis of the surveillance society and 
the dream of anarchistic autonomy’” (625). 
 
same, while the print version stresses our differences. Yet, there is much more at play. Studying 
253 in a contemporary context provides a fruitful site for rethinking the experience of print and 

While readers of the digital version would likely also experience a similar reaction while 

The context in which these navigational differences play out (e.g., whether the novel is 

Describing his novel, Ryman states that the digital version is about how we are all the 

digital writing. Its ability to defamiliarize an experience that is often taken for granted provokes a 
critical discussion — one that is especially important in the context of a global pandemic that has 
made access to libraries difficult at times and has introduced us all to online learning. As a result, 
many students now exclusively read required texts on digital platforms. This activity should be 
defamiliarized and made strange once again so we can examine its effects. 253 highlights the 
secretly hostile relationship between transmediated works, and reveals the need to revisit the 
effects of transmediation more broadly. 

Bibliography

Abba, Tom. “Archiving Digital Narrative: Some Issues.” Convergence: The International 

Journal of Research into New Media Technologies, vol. 18, no. 2, May 2012, pp. 121–25.

Adobe. Adobe Flash Player End of Life. https://www.adobe.com/products/ﬂashplayer/end-of-

life.html. Accessed 20 Apr. 2021.

Apple. “32-Bit App Compatibility with MacOS High Sierra 10.13.4 and Later.” Apple Support, 

https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT208436. Accessed 20 Apr. 2021.

Bluestone, George. “The Limits of the Novel and the Limits of the Film.” Film and Literature, 

edited by Ed Timothy Corrigan, Prentice Hall, 1997, pp. 197–212.

Colombino, Laura. “Negotiations with the System: J.G. Ballard and Geoff Ryman Writing 

London’s Architecture.” Textual Practice, vol. 20, no. 4, 2006, pp. 615–35.

Douglas, J. Y. The End of Books — Or Books Without End? Reading Interactive Narratives. U 

Michigan P,  2003.

Dwyer, Colin. “Publishers Sue Internet Archive For ‘Mass Copyright Infringement.’” NPR.Org, 
3 June 2020, https://www.npr.org/2020/06/03/868861704/publishers-sue-internet-archive-
for-mass-copyright-infringement.

Evans, Dylan. An Introductory Dictionary of Lacanian Psychoanalysis. Routledge, 1996.
Fink, Bruce. A Clinical Introduction to Lacanian Psychoanalysis. Harvard UP, 1997.
Grigar, Dene. “Archiving Electronic Literature: Selection Criteria, Methodology, and 

Challenges.” Journal of Archival Organization, vol. 15, no. 1–2, Apr. 2018, pp. 20–33.

Grossman, Wendy. “Underground Fiction.” Salon, 20 Apr. 1997, https://www.salon.com/

1997/04/20/london_2/.

Hayles, N. Katherine. My Mother Was a Computer: Digital Subjects and Literary Texts. U of 

Chicago P, 2005.

Kendall, Robert. “Hypertext: Foe to Print?” ACM SIGWEB Newsletter, vol. 9, no. 2–3, Web, 

2000, pp. 5–7.

Lacan, Jacques. The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psycho-Analysis. Edited by Ed Jacques-

Alain Miller, Translated by Alan Sheridan, W. W. Norton & Co, 1978.

Looy, Jan van. “One Must Be Calm and Laugh: Geoff Ryman’s Web Novel 253 as a 

Hypertextual Contemplation on Modernity.” Close Reading New Media: Analyzing 
Electronic Literature, edited by Jan van Looy and Jan Baetens, Leuven University Press, 
2003, pp. 101–20.

Myers, Tony. Slavoj Žižek. Routledge, 2003.
“National Emergency Library.” Internet Archive Blogs, https://blog.archive.org/national-

emergency-library/. Accessed 20 Apr. 2021.

Parker, Ian. Psychoanalytic Culture: Psychoanalytic Discourse in Western Society. Sage 

Publications, 1997.

Pfaller, Robert. Interpassivity: The Aesthetics of Delegated Enjoyment. Edinburgh University 

Press, 2017.

Ryman, Geoff. “253 - Interactive Novel Home.” Internet Archive: Wayback Machine, 5 Aug. 
2017, https://web.archive.org/web/20170805102010/http://www.ryman-novel.com/.

---. 253: Or Tube Theatre. 1996, http://www.ryman-novel.com.
---. 253: The Print Remix. Flamingo, 1998.
“Ryman-Novel.Com [Whois Lookup, Whois History & Reverse Whois].” WhoXY, https://

www.whoxy.com/ryman-novel.com. Accessed 23 Apr. 2021.

Schrimpf, Sabine. “Long-Term Preservation of Electronic Literature.” IPRES, 2008.
Žižek, Slavoj. How to Read Lacan. Granta Book, 2006.
---. “Is It Possible to Traverse the Fantasy in Cyberspace.” The Žižek Reader, edited by Eds 

Elizabeth Wright and Edmond Wright, Blackwell Publishers, 1999, pp. 102–24.

---. “The Cyberspace Real.” European Graduate School, 16 July 2008, https://web.archive.org/
web/20090620175803/http://www.egs.edu/faculty/zizek/zizek-the-cyberspace-real.html.

---. The Parallax View. MIT Press, 2006.

---. The Žižek Reader. Edited by Elizabeth Wright and Edmond Leo Wright, Blackwell 

Publishers, 1999.

