‘Lost water! Remains Scape?’: Transformation Waterscapes in Coimbatore from past 

to present through digital poetry 

Both digital humanities and digital literature are originated through an experimentation with 
computers  in  the  West.  Digital  Humanities  began  with  Robert  Busa’s  experimentation  with 
computers for creating Index for for Thomas Aquinas’ works. Similarly electronic literature 
was born when Christopher Strachey and Theo Lutz using computer to experiment the creative 
works in mid-twentieth century (Funkhouser 37). Later both fields were established through 
supports from the institutions, funding schemes, courses and programmes and other academic 
and research activities of the scholars in these fields. But these may look two distinct fields 
based on their fundamental approach towards creativity as one is producing creative works and 
another  is  applying  creative  method  to  study  works  of  humanities  disciplines.  However, 
electronic literature is part of digital humanities and even it can be visa  versa which can be 
explained in two ways.  For example, 1. digital humanities can adopt the creative practice for 
building  its  method,  organization  and  production.  Electronic  literature  can  be  a  more 
instrumental approach of DH for widening its praxis. 2. Since digital humanities investigates 
both digital born and digitized materials by using digital technologies, such approaches can be 
deployed to critically analyse the digital born creative works.  

The best example we can think of for interlinking the e-lit and DH is the Story writing machine 
in the novel Vendor of Sweets by R.K. Narayan (Narayan 74). It was published in the mid-20th 
century. The writer introduces a machine which can provide a formula for the story by clicking 
a few buttons of themes like love, revenge and hate and the interesting part is once the story is 
ready, the author can again use the machine for the text analysis of the story which is of course 
one of the cutting-edge features of digital humanities nowadays. What we are trying to say is 
that as this story writing machine, both the creative practice and scholarly practice of elit and 
DH have more affinity and capable of blurring the boundaries between humanities disciplines. 
Such  interlinking  has  been  established  in  the  western  countries.  For  example,  the  annual 
conference of electronic literature organization provides a space for both the performance of 
creative  works  and  scholarly  production  of  electronic  literature.  Similarly,  some  of  digital 
humanities  conference  and  workshops  offer  platforms  for  digital  artists  and  researchers. 
However,  in  India  we  have  some  specific  issues  to  deal  with  such  as  our  education  system 
rigidly follows the conventional mode of teaching and researching which resulted in lack of 
advanced  computer  literacy  for  humanities  scholars  and  students  and  lack  of  arts  and 
humanities  literacy  to  the  computer  science  students.  Computer  literacy  is  understood  as  a 
fundamental tool to obtain a job and not to explore/create literature and art.  

The digital poetry ‘Lost water! Remains Scape?’ is written in Tamil by the environmental poet 
Mohamed Rafiq and in English by Shanmugapriya T, the co-author of this paper. It is created 
using 2D and 3D environments, and photos in Blender and Adobe Animate software. The 2D 
and 3D environments reflect the narrative about the ecosystem of waterscapes in the past and 
the  photo  animations  represent  the  current  situation  of  the  water  bodies  in  Coimbatore,  the 
southern region in South India. This digital poetry is created based on the findings from our 
AHRC-funded project ‘Digital Innovations in Water Scarcity, Coimbatore, South India’. This 
interdisciplinary project investigates the changed waterscape in Coimbatore, South India across 

150  years  by  using  range  of  materials  and  activities  including  studying  historical  maps  and 
satellite  imagery,  and  conducting  interviews  with  local  farmers,  activists  and  NGOs.  This 
digital poetry is an endeavour to bridge gap between digital literature and digital humanities. 
The  questions  we  ask  in  this  paper  are  how  can  the  adoption/integration  of  digital  literary 
method be an effective agency and actor to represent the environmental objects and disseminate 
the  findings  for  targeted  audiences?  How  can  tools  and  methods  contribute  to  the  digital 
humanities and digital literature grounded in materials from the global south? The main aim of 
this paper is to explore the digital literary method as an effective agency to communicate the 
research findings to the broader public.  

Reminiscence  is  the  primary  theme  of  our  digital  poetry.  It  will  be  mediated  through  text, 
animations and images. Waterscape is an imperative source and forms a conducive ecological 
community  in  every  villages  of  the  region  Coimbatore.  It  is  a  primary  source  for  drinking, 
irrigation and other economic and cultural activities. However, the forgotten waterscapes due 
to  drought,  dereliction  and  climate  change  have  become  conduit  of  drainage  waters,  and 
garbage dumbing areas. The photos that have taken during our field visits depict the current 
condition of waterbodies among which most of them are in dreadful state. On the other hand, 
the oral  testimonies of the local  farmers illustrate a different  situation of waterscapes a few 
decades ago. They narrated how they were blessed to have had a healthy waterscape in the past. 
They also told us that there were particular flora and fauna that belong to the region had been 
destroyed  and  some  of  the  specific  species  such  as  Noyyal  Otter  had  gone  extinct.  The 
interactive  2D  and  3D  environment  of  digital  poetry  will  provide  a  revisitation  to  such  lost 
waterscapes created based on the oral testimonies. It will also portray the current condition of 
waterscapes  through  photo  animation  and  text  narration.  This  digital  poetry  will  be 
disseminated to students, scholars, activists and the general public through our academic and 
NGO partners and local schools and colleges. Feedback and some of the interviews conducted 
will be made available via the project website.  

1.  Historical map: The below image shows the British India historical map and the shiny 
element represents  the  rivers and tanks in  the region. This  stage is  divided into four 
layers based on the segregation of the Coimbatore region: Coimbatore, Erode, Tripur 
and Karur. Each layer visualizes the river and the disappearing and shrinking tanks in 
the district. The red colour represents disappeared tanks and blue colour is shrinking 
tanks. The poem and the text are implanted in the arrow images. They will pop up when 
the user/player moves the cursor near to them.  

2.  3D  environment  of  the  river:  The  3D  digital  animations  of  embodied  features  of 
waterscape such as the flowing water, fish, butterflies and trees portray the beautiful 
landscape of the river once Coimbatore had in the past. This animation will provide a 
revisit to the past and the poetry will arouse the emotions and reimagines the waterscape 
through both  the rhetoric visuals  and words. Apart from  this, this will provide some 
intriguing details about the rivers and tanks in the region which are extracted from the 
ethnographic study, historical texts and literature. For example, how 30 historical tanks 
and 23 anicuts of Noyyal river were created during the Chola period to store its surplus 
water  and  to  avoid  flooding  in  the  region  and  how  this  marvellous  engineering 

technique in the past kept the ground water level high. The rivers Cauvery and Bhavani 
confluence at the place Kooduthurai in Erode; however, the locals believe that another 
river called Amirtha nathi is also joining with these rivers underneath the rivers.  

3.  3D environment of tanks and channels: This animation illustrates the function of the 
tank  system  in  the  early  period.  The  poetry  and  texts  that  appended  with  the  tanks 
narrates the functioning of the tank system in the past and how that has a connection 
and  creates  a  cultural  landscape  in  the  local  custom.  For  example,  most  of  the  local 
Hindu festivals begin and end with bringing water from these tanks of what accentuate 
the pivotal of water in the cultural settings.  

4.  Photo  animation:  This  stage  has  multiple  layers  of  photo  animation.  The  photos  are 
taken  and  aggregated  during  the  field  visits  to  the  rivers,  channels  and  tanks.  These 
pictures display the current condition of the water bodies along with poetry and details 
about the photo. The below image exemplifies the Panjapatti lake which is located in 
Karur. It is the third big tank in Tamil Nadu and the original capacity of this tank is 
1820 acres but it is spreaded around only 1300 acres. The foundation of the tank began 
in 1837 and the construction was completed in 1911 during the British colonial period. 
It was a primary source to 18 villages in and around Panjapatti village. However, it has 
been dry for 16 years due to climate change and mismanagement of the water body. 
The tank is now silted by sand and utterly occupied by Prosopis juliflora plants.  

References 

Funkhouser, Chris. Prehistoric Digital Poetry an Archaeology of Forms, 1959- 
1995. The University of Alabama Press, 2007. 
 
Narrayan. R.K. The Vendor of Sweets. Viking Press books, 1967. 
 

 

