ELO 2021 Conference and Festival: Platform (Post?) Pandemic 
Co-chairs: Søren Pold, University of Aarhus and Scott Rettberg, University of Bergen 
May 24-28th, 2021 
 

 

An Institutional Approach to Building a Platform of Digital Literary Works: 

The Case(s) of Dutch and Flemish Digital Literature  
Siebe Bluijs, Tilburg University (the Netherlands) 

 

 

Please allow me to start this paper by making my intentions clear right away. My goal is to present our 

research project on electronic literature, to explain our theoretical approach, and – most important of 

all – to learn from researchers who have tackled similar issues and questions. Therefore, it is a great 

privilege to be able to present the project for you today at this conference, and I look forward to your 

comments and questions.  

 

Introducing the Project 

 

The recently formed Dutch Digital Literature Consortium – a partnership of researchers from  Dutch 

universities, the Royal Library of the Netherlands and local libraries – aims to develop and launch an 

online catalogue of digital literature, created in the Netherlands and Flanders between 1970 and 2023, 

and turn this collection into a publicly accessible digital database. The project draws inspiration from 

comparable databases, such as the Electronic Literature Collection 1-3, NT2, Hermaneia, and Literatura 

Electrónica Hispánica (cf. Pablo & Goicoechea 2014). Whereas these databases bring together digital 

literary projects from a variety of traditions, the project at hand focuses exclusively on works from a 

specific linguistic area. 

The catalogue’s target audience can be divided into three domains: 1) academic research 2) 

education – in particular secondary education, and 3) public libraries. The Consortium’s aim is to launch 

the  online  catalogue  by  the  end  of  2023.  It  will  be  hosted  by  CLARIAH  (Common  Lab  Research 

Infrastructure for the Arts and Humanities), a distributed research infrastructure for the humanities and 

social sciences funded by the Dutch government.  In preparation  for the catalogue, the Consortium 

gratefully makes use of the ELMCIP infrastructure in compiling a provisional list of electronic literature 

from  the  Netherlands  and  Flanders  (the  list  can  be  found  here:  https://elmcip.net/research-

collection/digital-literary-works-flanders-and-netherlands).  

Such a development of a database of electronic literature gives rise to several theoretical and 

methodological  questions.  The first  category of  questions  concerns  the  problem  of  documentation. 

Which works and genres are eligible to be included in the database, and on what grounds  can we 

make this selection? How are we to find, metadate, and categorize all available expressions of digital 

literature  created  in  the  Netherlands  and  Flanders?  As  a  postdoctoral  researcher,  it  is  my  role  to 

formulate answers to these questions, and as such lay a theoretical foundation for the database. 

The second category of questions concerns the issue of implementation. We wish to turn the 

collection  into  a  digital  catalogue  that  meets  the  FAIR  (findable,  accessible,  interoperable,  and 

reusable) principles (Wilkinson et al 2016). A second postdoc, who will start in October 2021, will be 

responsible for this second phase.  

At the moment, we are still in the documentation stage of the project. In the remainder of this 

paper, I will focus on our approach and present some preliminary results. Finally, I would very much 

appreciate any feedback or comments on this plan. 

 

An institutional approach 

 

The questions of documentation critically hinge on the fundamental question what electronic literature 

is. Given the changing nature of electronic literature, it is not very productive to try to pin down the 

phenomenon  based  on  a  limited  number  of  fixed  characteristics  (cf.  Tabbi  2009).  Nevertheless,  we 

need a starting point on which to base the selection criteria of the database.  

As  a  first  step  to  the  theoretical  foundation  of  our  database,  we  take  on  an  institutional 

approach to electronic literature. The question what belongs to the domain of electronic literature has 

been answered – explicitly and implicitly – by different actors and institutions involved with electronic 

literature,  such  as  funding  institutions,  libraries,  academic  scholars,  and  other  ‘gatekeepers’.  If,  as 

Florian Cramer claims, ‘electronic literature ha[s] established itself as a field in Pierre Bourdieu’s sense, 

i.e. as an area of production and discourse with intrinsic distinctions and authorities’ (Cramer 2012, 1), 

then we need to consider how such authorities push electronic literature in specific directions. 

Electronic  literature  is  institutionally  framed  in  various  ways.  By  initiating  and  financing 

projects, institutions unmistakably leave a mark on the material production of electronic literature (Van 

Dijk 2012, 2). They also play an important role in the symbolic production of the art form. This term 

refers to the question of whether a particular work belongs to the domain of (electronic) literature, but 

also  applies  in  a  more  general  sense  to  the  question  of  whether  electronic  literature  should  be 

regarded  as  a  (separate)  literary  genre.  Lastly,  institutions  often  play  an  important  role  in  the 

distribution  of  electronic  literature.  Research  centers  and  governmental  organizations  display 

electronic literature  through  online channels and – in non-pandemic times – on festivals and other 

events.  

Our  institutional  approach  consists  of  an  analysis  of  the  discourse  surrounding  electronic 

literature in the Netherlands and Flanders. First, we examine which digital genres and individual works 

are considered literary by the institutions. Next, we examine what is considered digital within specific 

contexts.  Lastly,  we  consider  how  the  qualifications  of  the  ‘literary’  and  the  ‘digital’  interact  in  the 

discourse of these institutions. The next step is to bring this discourse in relation to current debates 

within the international field of electronic literature.  

 

The benefits of an institutional approach 

 

In our view, an institutional analysis is productive for a number of reasons. First, an institutional analysis 

is valuable because it provides insight into processes of inclusion and exclusion: which works and forms 

are  institutionally  regarded  as  electronic  literature, and  on  what  grounds?  Which  forms  have  been 

overlooked?  Are  there  works  that  no  longer  fit  within  the  contemporary  framework  of  electronic 

literature? In addition to this, we believe an institutional approach can acommodate the fact that our 

own database is caught up in institutional dynamics as well. In other words, it provides a comparative 

starting point for our own selection criteria.  

Second, an institutional approach does justice to the fluid nature of electronic literature. In our 

view, an institutional analysis is contingent on a media and literary-historical analysis: it allows us to 

consider  transformations  in  both  the  media  landscape  and  the  literary  landscape.  After  all, what  is 

considered digital and what is considered literary changes over time. 

Lastly,  attention to  the  institutional frameworks  provides insight  into  the  unique  aspects of 

electronic literature in the Low Countries. Of course, we are aware that electronic literature is also a 

transnational phenomenon. However, we believe that electronic literature always takes shape within a 

specific techno-cultural context as well. By paying attention to the various ways in which institutional 

frameworks shape and determine electronic literature, we can bring the specificities of the Dutch and 

Flemish electronic literature traditions into focus. Our approach is thus a plea to consider the art form 

in relation to specific contexts. 

 

Preliminary results 

 

The  preliminary  results  of  our  research  into  the  institutional  framework  surrounding  electronic 

literature  in  the  Low  Countries  illustrate  this  final  point.  In  Flanders  and  the  Netherlands,  the 

institutional  framework  of  digital  literature  is  largely  reliant  on  governmental  subsidy  providers. 

Considering the ‘traditional’ literary institutions, the Letterenfonds (the Dutch Fund for Literature) is 

arguably the most important institution to support this art form, as became clear at an expert meeting 

on electronic literature organized by the Dutch Reading Foundation Stichting Lezen in 2017.  

 

This fact points to an important difference with other language areas. In the United States, for 

instance,  electronic  literature  has  traditionally  found  a  home  at  universities:  it  is  taught  at  creative 

writing  courses,  and  many  electronic literature  pioneers  have  been  employed  at  universities. In the 

words of Florian Cramer: ‘[E]lectronic literature was, and continues to be, as closely tied to literature 

departments  as  composed  computer  music  is  to  research  lab-style  university  studios,  at  least  in 

Northern America. On top of that, the critics were often the same people as the artists in those two 

academic  communities’  (Cramer  2012,  1).  In  Flanders  and  the  Netherlands,  such  an  institutional 
embedding  is  absent.1  Literature  departments  do  play  an  important  role,  however,  in  the  symbolic 
production of electronic literature. In fact, scholarship has been the most important form of reception, 

as Yra van Dijk explains: ‘Due to the absence of traditional gate-watchers like publishers and newspaper 

critics, the function of selection, distribution, and reception of this work has been taken over partly by 

anthologies, reviews and criticism that are produced in an academic climate’ (Van Dijk 2012, 1). Thus 

far,  publishers  have  largely  ignored  electronic  literature  (cf.  Stiller  2003).  Literary  magazines  have 

occasionally paid attention to the phenomenon (Baetens & Vos 1999; Van Adrichem 2006).  

The  institutional  framework  unmistakably  leaves  its  mark  on  the  productions.  All  projects 

funded  by  the  Letterenfonds,  for  instance,  involve  authors  who  can  be  institutionally  classified  as 

‘literary’ authors. On the one hand, this qualification points – petitio principii – to their role in the literary 

domain:  their  works  have  been  published  by  literary  publishers  and  they  have  often  won  literary 

                                                             
1 The notable exception is Victor Gijsbers, who is a professor of philosophy at Leiden University and a renowned 

author of interactive fiction. 

awards. On the other hand, the term ‘literary’ also concerns a judgement of value. A publication by the 

Letterenfonds and branch organization KVB Boekwerk mentions the ‘unmistakable literary qualities’ of 

the  electronic  literature  productions  they  have  highlighted.  The  authors  specify  these  qualities  as: 

‘nuance, complexity, empathy and defamiliarization’ (Dresscher e.a. 2017, 2). 

Overseeing  the  productions  of  electronic  literature  created  with  financial  help  of  the 

Letterenfonds, a clear division of roles stands out as well: the literary authors provided the text, while 

a (team of) creator(s) was responsible for the technical realization. The institutional framework thus 

partly determines the shared authorship of digital literature, as is shown by Yra van Dijk in her analysis 

of works financed by the Letterenfonds (Van Dijk 2012, 7; cf. Hayles 2006). Arnoud van Adrichem and 

Jan  Baetens  interpret  the  institutional  embeddedness  of  electronic  literature  as  an  attempt  to 

encapsulate a phenomenon that threatens to undermine traditional actors of the literary field (2009, 

21). They claim that literary institutions have shielded electronic literature as an experimental form with 

a highbrow image.  

The scholarship on electronic literature in Flanders and the Netherlands has focused on works 

that meet this description as well. Almost all academic studies on electronic literature from Flanders 

and the Netherlands date from the first decade of the millennium (see for example: Van Looy 2003; 

Van Adrichem 2009; Van Adrichem & Baetens 2009; Van Dijk 2012). These studies  mainly focus on 

animated  poetry  and  works  that  make  use  of  the  affordances  of  the  internet.  In  other  words, 

scholarship  has  been limited  to  works of  the  ‘second  generation’, to  refer  to  N.  Katherine  Hayles’s 

famous distinction (Hayles 2002). This is no surprise, considering that, as Phillipe Bootz has pointed 

out, ‘in a European context hypertext has not been the dominant mode but rather textual generators 

and animated works’ (Hayles 2008, 18; cf. Bootz 1999).  

 

Alternative approaches 

 

Generally,  electronic literature  from  Flanders  and  the  Netherlands  is  institutionally  understood  as  a 

form of experimental literature that was at its peak in the first decade of the millennium. The question 

arises to what extent this conception of electronic literature eclipses alternative conceptions. In a 2012 

article, Florian Cramer argued that the notion of electronic literature as intrinsically experimental fails 

to reflect the way in which literary forms are disseminated and consumed in our current digital age. 

The nature of digital media and their impact on society, and their place in people’s lives have changed 

dramatically over the past two decades. A renewed look at electronic literature can shed light on both 

the present and the past of this art form. Recent international scholarship on electronic literature offers 

starting points for such an approach. 

 

Approaches of the ‘first’ and ‘second generation’ explicitly considered electronic literature in 

relation to the concept of ‘New Media’. These approaches have run along two tracks: 1) on the one 

hand,  there  is  an  emphasis  on  the  continuity  with  older  artistic  traditions.  2)  On  the  other  hand, 

electronic  literature  breaks with  these  traditions,  which  has  mainly  to  do  with  the  affordances  that 

digital media bring (cf. Rettberg 2018). Maria Engberg & Jay David Bolter, for instance, consider Brian 

Kim Stefans’s The Dream-Life of Letters (Stefans 2000) as a continuation of avant-garde poetry, which 

Stefans’s Flash poem seems to ‘complete’ (Engberg & Bolter 2012, 10). This approach has been fruitful 

understanding the affordances that the computer has provided for literature as an art form. However, 

while computers are still relatively young in comparison to the technology of the book, we can ask 

ourselves to what extent the notion of digital media as ‘new’ still holds up today. 

As the nature and function of digital media in society has shifted, scholars have argued for new 

approaches  to  electronic  literature.  One  of  these  scholars  is  Spencer  Jordan,  who  states:  ‘Running 

alongside  [the]  tradition  of  the  avant-garde  and  the  experimental  [electronic  literature],  is  a  more 

recent  condition  which,  rather  than  responding  to  digital  technology’s  novelty  and  originality,  is 

instead a recognition of its overwhelming presence in everyday life’ (Jordan 2019, 10). He adds: ‘In a 

world  where  computerisation  is  fundamentally  normalised,  any  understanding  of  the  digital  as 

subversive and radical becomes redundant’ (Jordan 2019, 16).  

In this light, it is necessary to go beyond the paradigm of literary experimentation. This opens 

the door to forms that do not align themselves with ‘the literary tradition formed by the print world’, 

as  the  second  generation  did  (Flores  2019,  10).  Leonardo  Flores  has  proposed  the  label  of  ‘3rd 

generation e-literature’ for works that instead can be identified ‘with electronic and digital media in 

terms of its formats and publication models’ (Flores 2019, 10). One of the most popular forms  in this 

category  is  Instagram  poetry.  In  recent  years,  Dutch  and  Flemish  poets  who  publish  their  work 

(exclusively) on Instagram and Twitter have gained popularity (Dera & Van der Starre 2019). In the Low 

Countries, their work is hardly ever considered as a form electronic literature, however, since this label 

is reserved for the more experimental works of earlier years.  

The question of whether Instagram poetry should be classified as ‘electronic literature’ is still 

under debate in the community of electronic literature scholars (cf. Berens 2019). The case of Instagram 

poetry does show that an institutional approach that only considers the traditional gatekeepers (i.e. 

academia,  publishers,  funding  institutions),  has  its  limitations.  If  we  want  to  understand  electronic 

literature, we  also need to take its users into consideration, as Flores suggests when he writes that 

‘third generation [digital literature] coexists with the previous one and accounts for a massive scale of 

born digital work produced by and for contemporary audiences for whom digital media has become 

naturalized’ (2019, x; cf. Gitelman 2006, 61). 

When we leave behind the strict focus on literary experimentation, an alternative story about 

electronic literature in the Low Countries opens up. Recently, there has been institutional appreciation 

for early hypertext stories, albeit not from an academic or a literary perspective. The hypertext works 

Nijmeegs avontuur (Wim Couwenberg 1980) and Hollanditis (1985, John Vanderaart) were included in 

the Videogames Canon, which was initiated by the Netherlands Institute for Sound and Image. These 

works are part of the history of video games from the Low Countries, but they belong to the history of 

electronic literature as well – especially because of their reliance on text. A history of Dutch and Flemish 

hypertext fiction remains to be written (cf. Van Looy 2003).   

Equally  little  is  known  about  forms  of  ‘prehistoric’  electronic  literature  –  to  use  Christoper 

Funkhouser’s (2007) apt label for forms of electronic literature that predate the hypertext works from 

the  1980s  and  ’90s.  Articles  on  Gerrit  Krol  and  Greta  Monach  point  to the  fact  that  Dutch  authors 

experimented with the possibilities of the computer as early as the 1970s (Mourits 2018; Martin 2020). 

Additional  research  into  both  literary  and  non-literary  forms  of  early  computer  experimentation  is 

needed.  

 

Concluding remarks 

 

Considering that the first volume of the Electronic Literature Collection dates from 2006, one could say 

our database of electronic literature from Flanders and the Netherlands arrives somewhat late to the 

party.  This  late  arrival,  however,  gives  us  the  opportunity  to  draw  on  the  extensive  (international) 

scholarship on electronic literature and to place different emphases. 

The preliminary results of our institutional approach show that the ‘traditional’ gatekeepers of 

electronic literature in the Low Countries have framed the genre as a form of highbrow experimental 

literature that was at its peak in the first decade of the millennium. While literary experimentation is 

without a doubt  an important  aspect of the form’s history and genealogy, there are other possible 

conceptions and forms of electronic literature that can and should have a place in its historiography 

as well. We can consider, for instance, how electronic literature relates to the history of digital media 

in  a  larger  sense.  In such  an  approach,  the  history  of  video  games  overlaps with  that  of  electronic 

literature. Additionally, we should recognize that the users of digital media have institutional agency 

as well. In this regard, the popularity of forms like Instagram poetry, for instance, challenges traditional 

conceptions of electronic literature. 

 

 

Bibliography 

 

VAN ADRICHEM 2009 

A. van Adrichem, (ed.), ‘Elektronische literatuur’, in: Parmentier, 15, 1, 2006. 

VAN ADRICHEM & BAETENS 2009 

A. van Adrichem & J. Baetens, ‘Elektronische poëzie: een nieuwe spiegel voor de literatuur?’, in: 

Vooys, 27, 4, 2009, 16-22. 

BAETENS & VOS 1999. 

J. Baetens, & E. Vos, Erik (eds.), ‘Elektronische literatuur’, In: DW B, 4, 1999. 

BERENS 2019 

K.I. Berens, ‘E-Literature’s #1 Hit: Is Instagram Poetry E-literature?’, in: electronic book review, 

04-07-2019. 

BOOTZ 1999 

P. Bootz, ‘The Functional Point of View: New Artistic Forms for Programmed Literary Works’, 

Leonardo, 32, 4, 1999, 307-316. 

CRAMER 2012 

 

F. Cramer, ‘Post-Digital Writing’, in: electronic book review, 12-12-2012.  

DERA & VAN DER STARRE 2019 

J. Dera & K. van der Starre, ‘Instagrampoëzie in de klas’, in: Levende talen magazine, 106, 5, 

2019, 4-9.  

 

 

DRESSCHER e.a. 2017 

P.  Dresscher,  N.  ’t  Hooft  &  E.  O’Hare,  Digitale  literatuur.  Scan  van  innovatieve  projecten. 

Nederlands Letterenfonds & KVB Boekwerk, 2017. 

VAN DIJK 2012 

Y.  van  Dijk,  ‘Topdown  Digital  Literature:  The  Effects  of  Institutional  Collaborations  and 

Communities’, in: Dichtung Digital, 42, 2012, 1-14. 

FLORES 2019 

L. Flores, ‘Third Generation Electronic Literature’, in: electronic book review, 04-07-2019. 

FUNKHOUSER 2007 

C.T. Funkhouser,  Prehistoric Digital Poetry. An Archaeology of Forms, 1959-1995. Tuscaloosa, 

University of Alabama Press, 2007. 

GITELMAN 2006 

L. Gitelman. Always Already New. Media, History, and the Data of Culture. Cambridge & London, 

MIT Press, 2006.  

HAYLES 2002 

N.K.  Hayles,  ‘Deeper  into  the  Machine:  Learning  to  Speak  Digital’,  in:  Computers  and 

Composition, 19, 2002, 371-386. 

HAYLES 2006 

N.K. Hayles, ‘The Time of Digital Poetry: From Object to Event’, in: A. Morris & T. Swiss (eds.), 

New Media Poetics: Contexts, Technotexts, and Theories. Cambridge, MIT Press, 2006, 181-210. 

HAYLES 2008 

N.K. Hayles, Electronic Literature. New Horizons for the Literary. Notre Dame, University of Notre 

Dame Press, 2008. 

VAN LOOY 2003 

J.  van  Looy,  ‘Grenzen  aan  het  grenzeloze.  Een  verkenning  van  hypertekststructuren  in 

electronische literatuur’, in: Spiegel der letteren, 45, 1, 2003, 337-359. 

MARTIN 2020 

W. Martin, ‘Greta Monach en de geschiedenis van de computerpoëzie in de lage landen en 

omstreken’,  in:  Ooteoote.nl,  26-03-2020.  Via:  https://ooteoote.nl/2020/03/greta-monach-en-

de-geschiedenis-van-de-computerpoezie-in-de-lage-landen-en-omstreken/  

MOURITS 2018 

B. Mourits, ‘Poëzie als programmeertaal’, in: Literatuurmuseum, 24 november 2018. Available 

online: http://literatuurmuseum.com/artikelen/poezie-als-programmeertaal.  

PABLO & GOICOECHEA 2014 

L.  Pablo  en  M.  Goicoechea,  ‘A  Survey  of  Electronic  Literature  Collections’,  in:  CLCWeb: 

Comparative Literature and Culture, 16, 5, 2014: https://doi.org/10.7771/1481-4374.2558. 

RETTBERG 2014 

S. Rettberg, ‘Electronic Literature’, in: M.-L. Ryan, L. Emerson & B.J. Robertson (red.), The Johns 

Hopkins Guide to Digital Media. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University Press, 2014, 169-174. 

 

 

RETTBERG 2018 

 

S. Rettberg, Electronic Literature. Cambridge, Polity Press, 2018. 

TABBI 2009 

J.  Tabbi,  ‘On  Reading  300  Works  of  Electronic  Literature:  Preliminary  Reflections’,  in:  G. 

Comstock,  P.  Shipton,  S.  Haslanger,  W.  Lycan,  (ed.), On  the  Human  Forum,  URL  = 

http://nationalhumanitiescenter.org/on-the-human/2009/07/on-reading-300-works-of-

electronic-literature-preliminary-reflections/ 

WILKINSON e.a. 2016 

M. Wilkinson, M. Dumontier, I. Aalbersberg, et al. ‘The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific 

data management and stewardship’, in: Sci Data 3, 160018, 2016. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.18 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Biography 

 

Siebe Bluijs is a postdoctoral researcher at Tilburg University, the Netherlands. He holds a PhD in Dutch 

Literature from Ghent University (Belgium). His research interests concern the relations between media 

and meaning-making in literary works. His current research focuses on 'digital literature' (e.g. poetry 

that employs kinetic typography, literary smartphone applications, and narratives in virtual reality). In 

his PhD-project, he analyzed the form and functioning of the postwar literary radio play in the Low 

Countries, focusing on innovations in narrative and semiotic composition. Bluijs extensively writes on 

contemporary (Dutch) literature, and is particularly interested in experimental literature. Additionally, 

he has a background in graphic design, with a specialization in book design and typography. 

