 

ELO21 Susie Cronin 

 
 
ELO21 : 28 May 2021/ Panel: Platform Possibilities and Beyond  
Dr. Susie Cronin 
 
“Interacting with Empathy: Migrant Narrative in the Context of Mobile Apps” 
 
Abstract 
 
This paper explores two mobile app narratives that deal with the issue of 
perilous irregular migration, Survival (2017, Omnium Lab) and Bury me, my love 
(2017, The Pixel Hunt/Figs/Arte France). This paper explores the way in which 
the mobile app form lends itself to elevation of migrant narratives and explores 
the capacity of such works to generate empathy.   
The paper will analyse the way in which migration and its subjects are treated 
and placed into relation with the notion of the game. The paper will also address 
the comparison between game-style apps and other online modes whereby 
migrant experience is being represented, such as that of humanitarian 
photojournalism and portraiture as it arises in social media apps, such as 
Instagram. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

1 

 

ELO21 Susie Cronin 

 
Interacting with Empathy: Migrant Narrative in the Context of Mobile Apps 
 
 
Introduction 
 
This paper arose from my discovery on reading in the most recent IOM World 
Migration Report, published in 2020, that migrant narratives have been rendered in 
expressive digital forms, including the Survival narrative mobile app, which the report 
specifically names.i Survival introduces itself in its Google Play store blurb 
description as a ‘serious game about the human tragedy of migration.’ii I was curious 
when I first read about the app, developed in Algeciras, Spain, by young Spaniards, 
among them migrants and refugees, whether the apparent paradox of a ‘serious game’ 
could succeed in representing the more fraught elements of migrant experience, 
gamifyng without trivialising.  
 
Perhaps the need to add a defensive epithet, ‘serious,’ gestures to the traditional 
relegation of the game to light-hearted and simplistic subjects and aims. Apps such as 
Survival fall not so much within the scope of the commercial video game, but rather 
that which Rita Raley terms the ‘persuasive game,’ designated as an art practice, a 
piece of instructive art, more so than a marketable product designed as an enjoyable 
distraction from the ‘real’ world.iii Raley emphasises the particular aptitude of the 
persuasive game form for dealing with ‘political themes such as labor, migrancy and 
war.’iv  
 
It is in this vein that I read Survival, as an app that undertakes the tools of ludics and 
interactivity to relay a didactic experience. Of course, forced migration is not a game 
to be played, but one of the most controversial and traumatic issues currently being 
faced – or not, as the case may be - globally. In recent years, it has become apparent 
that different approaches to generating, delivering, and elevating migrant and refugee 
narratives are necessary, and indeed constructive, in order to promote understanding 
and hopefully contribute to fairer, safer and more humane routes to safety.  
 
While journalism and photographic reporting are essential in this regard, the starkness 
of the facts and the not infrequent lack of objectivity and empathy exercised in 
reporting to some degree fall short of the crucial rehumanisation of those affected by 
issues such as trafficking, forced and/or irregular migration, and separation from 
family members.v Gradually, certain outlets of the media can be seen to move away 
from a distant, detached point of observation and instead take an approach that places 
refugees at the centre of these stories, and the way in which personal accounts and 
experiences are relayed offers a more complete picture of the complex lives of people 
on the move. Moving away from a language dominated by crisis and tragedy, which 
tends to facilitate a reductive understanding of these problems as somehow universal, 
homogenous and irresoluble, innate in some way to the identity of those affected by 
them, such an approach affords the opportunity to pluralise understandings and 
elaborate on the many facets of migrant experience, not least the importance of 
resilience, humour, collaboration, and strategy.  
 
The fact that migrants participated in the creation of Survival, and that Bury me, my 
Love was based on true experiences is encouraging, and supports the apparent turn 

 

2 

 

ELO21 Susie Cronin 

taking place that suggests that migrant narratives are being reclaimed, recast and 
internally reframed by communities of people on the move. Detection of this 
representative shift, or at least the broadening of representative outlets, calls for a re-
examination of the one-dimensionality of the migrant narrative paradigm as mobilised 
by mainstream media, whereby media typically speak on behalf of such groups to a 
presumed, detached, and materially comfortable audience, and invites further 
exploration of these communities in terms of how they understand and represent 
themselves from within. 
 
Digital Journeys and Empathy  
 
Luc Boltanski (quoted in Walker Rettberg) has argued that ‘the aestheticisation of 
what we see in the media emotionally and morally insulates viewers from the 
suffering of others.’vi However we might also choose to see the ways in which 
aesthetics may be mobilised to make the suffering of others a more tangible and 
relatable phenomenon. The media often fail to depict the faces of refugees, or 
deliberately depict large groups of men, whereas portraiture offers the chance to break 
this fourth wall and bring the viewer face to face with children on the move, as well 
as observing interactions between families. While, on the one hand, the scrolling 
Instagram user might find the sudden appearance of a refugee portrait a jarring 
interruption to the pastel-hued interiors and stencilled lattes that dominate the 
platform, these accounts hold a powerful capacity to disrupt apathy and serve as 
strong and crucial reminders that this, too, is life.vii 
 
While photography and storytelling over social media prove valuable as tools to 
educate the broader public and restore human faces to sensationalised media reports 
that run the risk of reducing these vulnerable lives to numbers, they are just one outlet 
among many possibilities for the representation of the more human side of migration 
narratives. Here I will explore two narratives set in the specific migration corridor 
from Syria to Europe, that have as their backdrop the highly dangerous Mediterranean 
routes. As distinct from more practically orientated apps, such as the Italian-
developed app game Workeen, which provides migrants with information to assist 
them in navigating the European job market, the apps I will discuss below are 
specifically dedicated to storytelling and fostering engagement with the different 
aspects of refugee’s journeys and experiences.viii 
 
 
Survival 
 
Survival is an app that is free to download, and which challenges the app user to align 
with a migrant who is faced with a number of difficult decisions: in the first level, the 
player’s avatar encounters a wolfish figure, depicting the common presence of people 
smugglers in zones of conflict and socio-political upheaval. The conversation that is 
generated offers the player options of two responses; to an extent they ‘choose’ the 
unfolding of the conversation by deciding whether to disclose information or accept 
offers of help from the stranger. Their interactive engagement with these choices 
quickly demonstrates to the user how illusory and constrained the choices are for 
those who find themselves in these vulnerable situations.  
 

 

3 

 

ELO21 Susie Cronin 

The user navigates through the levels in Survival not so much in an embodied mode 
but rather symbolised in the form of a quite nondescript human outline. The emphasis 
is thus placed on the experience as one in which the user is implanted, rather than 
centred in the perceptions of the figure whose journey they are undertaking. This is 
quite distinct from the approach taken in the other app I will discuss later in this 
presentation, Bury me, my love.  
 
While the layout of the Survival app allows for sensitisation to the conditions under 
which difficult, irregular migration takes place, arguably its power to convey the 
depth of this experience is limited by the fact that it does not root its narrative levels 
in a developing protagonist; something that makes it easier to dismiss the obstacles 
encountered as inconveniences to be avoided, in the spirit of the game, rather than 
fully contextualising the dangers that compel such decisions and give rise to these 
struggles. One of the user reviews in the Google Play store reads ‘I like it but why 
does the boat level have to take so long’ (sic.)ix   
 
 

 

Level 1 of Survival 
 
 
The Survival app is commendable for its general simplicity: the facts outlined at the 
beginning of each instalment of the game contextualise the issues that come into play 
as the user navigates the dark and testing landscapes. The language is objective and 
informative; it is simple enough for older children and young adults to engage with. I 
would like to think that the app could serve as an educational resource for parents 
wishing to gently but realistically introduce their children to some of the issues faced 
by those forced to undertake dangerous journeys and the struggles faced by people 
seeking to construct a safe and dignified life outside of their country of origin.  
 
Survival is just one isolated example of an app that deals with migrant and refugee 
experience through game aesthetics and digital narrative; the organisation Games for 
Change specialises in convening and fostering the development of games with a 
social conscience that broaden on mainstream narratives of gender, culture and 
society.x Games for Change have highlighted a number of games, apps, and VR 
works that adopt migrant narratives in order to offer an interactive and educational 
experience.  
 

 

4 

 

ELO21 Susie Cronin 

Once such example is the narrative VR work, ‘Another Dream,’ which is not so much 
a game as a virtual documentary that focuses on the specific LGBT refugee 
experience of a young migrant couple. The narrative unfolds as an immersive digital 
experience in which the protagonist recounts the couple’s flight from post-revolution 
Egypt to seek asylum in the Netherlands. The creator of ‘Another Dream,’ Tamara 
Shogaolu, believes in the use of first-person narration and the connection to the 
protagonist’s voice as a vehicle for intimacy and empathy.xi 
 
 
Bury me, my love 
 
Indeed, the personal aspect adds greatly to the power of these narratives, and I would 
argue that this is one of the weaknesses of Survival, and a factor that limits the app’s 
scope for creating empathetic engagement. Characterisation in the app narrative, Bury 
me, my love, by contrast, is highly compelling, and the way in which the narrative 
entwines itself in the temporalities and tones of instant messaging is exemplary of the 
great potential of the mobile app as a fitting platform and a promising vehicle for 
immersive storytelling.xii The user grants the app permission to send push 
notifications to their device, which means that the narrative unfolds at its own pace, 
with the frequent interruptions and suspensions typical of communicating with 
someone on the move. Just as Nour is at the mercy of doubts, obstacles, and delays 
encountered on her journey, the app user must also wait patiently for the app to notify 
them of updates or messages received. 
 
In terms of characterisation, Bury me, my love attains a warm and believable register 
from the outset. The dialogue resists any tendency towards melodrama, and in fact the 
central couple are quite droll. While the dangers of Nour’s departure from Syria are 
made clear, the tone of the exchanges is often deadpan, playful or ironic.  
 
 
 
 

 

5 

 

ELO21 Susie Cronin 

 

Conversation between Nour (yellow) and Majd (white) in Bury me, my love 
 
 
Nour and Majd’s exchanges are snappy and by no means overly sentimental. When 
this chirpy tone breaks for a moment, it is exceptional. At one stage in the 
conversation, Nour confesses to Majd that she is weary and fed up of the abuse she is 
enduring. This is the first truly frank mention of difficulty in its pure form: hitherto 
Nour has been playfully framing her interactions as a sort of adventure, whereby she 
reckons mischievously with obstacles in her way, sneaking on the bus, for example, 
with an almost impish spirit imbuing her descriptions. The very occasional frank and 
jarring message comes as a sharp reminder that she is continually euphemising her 
experience for Majd’s sake. Majd and the user that is aligned with him are equally 
startled to hear this. It might be argued that at this point the reader is reminded to 
query the truth of Nour’s accounts and they are thus compelled into a more actively 
compassionate role, rather than a more passive and unquestioning receiver of the 
accounts received from Nour as a plain relation of events. 
 
This rare jab of the cruel reality that Nour is confronting is thus all the more powerful 
as a generator of affect for its brevity, and its break from the conversations’ ‘usual’ 
tone, insofar as it calls into question all that has been recounted previously, and what 
else may not have been included in Nour’s accounts. Majd, when Nour relays to him 
that she has been spat at countless times, as well as being insulted, is lost for words. 
When the reply bleeps through this simulated conversation: “I had no idea…” it 
serves as a reminder that we are merely living a mediated version of the experience 
that Nour’s journey represents. The fiction she relays is a sort of self-defence 
mechanism from the cruel realities of her journey. The ostensible intimacy, then, of 
the communications between the couple cannot bridge the gap between the experience 

 

6 

 

ELO21 Susie Cronin 

of struggle and the way in which it is recounted, lightened for an easier delivery to a 
loved one. 
 

 

Screenshot from Bury me, my love 
 
 
In terms of the interactive dimension of the narrative, the app user adopts the role of 
Nour’s husband, Majd, and they are given limited choices of how they respond to 
Nour’s text updates. Occasionally the app prompts ‘Majd’ to send a selfie, which is 
animated and provided as a feature within the app itself. The way in which Bury me, 
my love inhabits the user’s device means that it runs parallel to the user’s real life, 
their phone screen is interspersed with updates and cues to resume the conversation 
between Majd and Nour. This fragmentation and spreading of the narrative gives 

 

7 

 

ELO21 Susie Cronin 

depth to the journey depicted, conveying a more realistic sense of the delays and 
distances involved.  
 
The separation of the protagonists from each other is also conveyed by these 
interruptions – Nour occasionally cuts the conversation short, wary of low phone 
battery, etc. Majd, like the app user, benefits from relative stability, and the comfort 
of convenient charging facilities, as Nour is the one who is on the move.  
 
As Nour’s correspondent, the user is constrained to endure the same delays and 
periods of suspense between updates. This tendency to advance to the next level that 
characterises the game genre and feels more present in an app such as Survival is 
largely absent from Bury me, my love. The user is held to adapt to the intradiegetic 
logic and events of the narrative app and the journey it depicts. The app runs in the 
background of the device user, who will occasionally receive a message notification 
from the app along the lines of ‘made it past the Turkish border.’ 
 
The above exchange reminds the user of Bury me, my love of the somewhat ironic 
discrepancy between presence and access to information about one’s environment in 
the Internet age. Nour is making her way clandestinely across borders and, due to her 
limitations in access to phone charging facilities (at one point she jokes that ‘I doubt 
I’ll find electrical outlets on the side of the road’), she is dependent on Majd to fill in 
gaps in knowledge and provide information to her about the nature of her 
surroundings. Despite being present ‘on the ground,’ Nour is not in a position to 
circulate freely and ask for information in Eastern Europe, and certainly not to ask 
questions in relation to immigration and border control updates. The above screenshot 
is taken from an exchange of texts in which Nour relays that she is travelling in a 
horsebox. Nour interrupts Majd’s quip about her deodorant coming in useful to tell 
him ‘Well anyway/ You should look into Croatia because if we need a change of 
plans I’d rather be prepared for it.’ Majd is reminded of his relative comfort with 
regard to his access to information. We imagine his search for information paralleling 
her journey and updates; when Nour updates Majd that she has arrived safely in 
Belgrade but that there are ‘police everywhere / I’ll let you know as soon as I know,’ 
we imagine he might search for news reports that might let him piece together some 
context for these fragmentary images.    
 
Unlike Survival, which has an introductory page with six thumbnails that signifies a 
kind of index of the levels to be navigated, Bury me, my love is a narrative that gives 
much less signposting to its user in terms of the duration of its unfolding. The 
commitment of engaging interactively with Survival is quite measurable: the first 
level is relatively brief, and it is one of six. There is no aerial view of Bury me, my 
love’s breadth or the time it will take to unfold; from a user review, I gleaned that to 
play the game from start to finish takes a total of 90 minutes, but this is not possible to 
do uninterrupted, as the stalling and waiting on Nour’s end are important elements for 
conserving the verisimilitude of the journey. In a sense, this conveys the urgency of 
the communications the narrative depicts: the user finds themselves rushing to check 
a notification, hopeful for promising updates on Nour’s progress. One review 
criticised the largely one-sided nature of the dialogue, but one has to wonder whether 
the didactic ambitions of the narrative should be privileged over the enjoyability of 
the game or the opportunities for player participation.xiii  
 

 

8 

 

ELO21 Susie Cronin 

The app has been largely praised by user reviews in the gaming community, which 
respond positively to its characterisation and aesthetics. Depending on the user’s 
selections and responses on behalf of Majd, the game has 19 possible endings. While 
the title’s allusion to burial might be interpreted as harking to a tragic end, it is in fact 
that translation of quite a common Syrian Arabic expression that is often used when 
saying goodbye.  
 
Another issue raised as a negative in reviews of Bury me, my love is the fact that the 
player’s choices are not incentivised, there are no structures resembling rewards or 
points to be won within the game.xiv The responses selected by the user simply stand 
in for responses from Majd, which keep the narrative moving. There is no right 
answer as such, neither of the two options prompts any kind of boost for the player. 
For users playing for the emotional fluctuations and competitive energy commanded 
by a more conventional video game, these aspects are naturally a little 
underwhelming. It could be argued that this is more a categorisation issue than 
anything else: the app is, strictly speaking, an interactive narrative more so than a 
video game, and yet the relative novelty of the former genre means that apps such as 
Bury me, my love will be advertised and categorised as games, and as a result assessed 
against the criteria of the game, on account of the medium on which they are relayed 
and their nonlinear structure. 
 
The issue of the game as a questionable format for ‘serious’ or topical narrative thus 
recurs, particularly considering the issue of categorisation. The interactive narratives 
of Survival and Bury me, my love adopt the form of a game more so in the sense of 
their interactive and engaging features – the enhancements that the app platform can 
bring to otherwise linear prose or mono/dialogues – than in terms of transforming 
their subject matter into something as light-hearted as a point-scoring exercise. That 
said, in the first two levels of Survival, the player must navigate forwards, first 
through a nocturnal medina, and then through the sea at night, collecting coins as they 
move through the darkened streets and cross choppy waves.  
 
These hallmarks of simpler games in which the player must collect ‘lives’ are 
arguably not out of place in the context of Survival, which deals on an allegorical 
level with conserving secrecy, safety, and resources. One mode in which we might 
contemplate the seemingly problematic encounter between entertainment and social 
issues that correspond to real-life peril and suffering is that of ‘pleasure activism,’ a 
concept offered by author and social media phenomenon adrienne marie brown, who 
argues that rendering the discussion and pursuit of social justice into forms that are 
enjoyable need not be an issue per se, but indeed may serve as vital to the furthering 
of progress on important social issues.xv 
 
The way in which Bury me, my love runs adjacent to the user’s other social media and 
messaging updates could also be read on an allegorical level, insofar as it is a 
narrative that the user must choose to make space for. Permission must be granted to 
the app; the user must choose whether its updates are of value to them, whether they 
are something worth paying attention to. In the competition for attention that 
implicitly runs between the competing apps in a device, each one nudging the phone 
user to dive back in, the narrative of Bury me, my love must be intentionally accorded 
elevated status. More than a narrative, if the player is to persevere with the game, they 

 

9 

 

ELO21 Susie Cronin 

must adopt a sense of attachment and urgency in relation to Bury me, my love’s 
protagonists and their fate. 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
The fact that these narratives are engaged with on a voluntary basis, and on devices 
and through media usually reserved for entertainment, call for attention. The mobile 
phone nonetheless represents an intersection between practicality and entertainment, 
urgency and distraction. As distinct from mobile app platforms, VR narratives for 
instance require the infrastructure and resources of a gallery space, which determines 
to whom the work becomes visible. Galleries are undeniably gated spaces, frequented 
by people who enjoy the freedom to dedicate their leisure to the deliberate 
consumption of niche art forms. The use of the mobile app thus may be read as a 
more democratic choice of platform in the case of these narratives, and a platform on 
whose use the privileged person and the migrant may converge.  
 
This paper has probed some of the initial questions surrounding app-based games as 
instruments for encouraging empathy on social issues, and their ultimate potential to 
function as catalysts for social change. Specifically thinking about two examples of 
migrant narrative here, these ideas resonate also with the forms that have been 
developed to explore the complexity of LGBT issues and violence endured by 
members of this minority community. A return to the ‘persuasive game’ notion will 
no doubt prove fruitful in gaining a fuller understanding of the game form beyond 
ludics, operating more intentionally as a catalyst for change. 
 
I would like to broaden on this by posing the question of whether the notion of the 
‘serious game’ or ‘persuasive game’ inverts the traditionally held perception of the 
video game form as rooted in fantastical escapism, instead engaging the player in 
urgent immersion and confrontation with ‘real world’ issues. In the two examples 
discussed here, characterisation was felt to be a crucial element to the engendering of 
empathy in the app user. The reviews testify to a valorisation of authenticity and 
believable characterisation that stands in contrast to the reductive idea of gamified 
space as escapist and superficial. 
 
In reference to the title of this panel, ‘Platform Possibilities and Beyond,’ I am 
interested in the way in which migrant narrative can be captured and expressed not 
only in the app narrative form, but also in terms of taking up space on social media 
sharing platforms such as Instagram, dominated by commercially-sponsored and 
heavily stylised content. Content created by people on the move and communities 
traditionally marginalised by social media algorithms in my view stands to powerfully 
transport the platform into an iteration beyond itself, salvaging storytelling from 
collapse into mercantile boomerangs and seeding awareness and solidarity with social 
justice issues. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

10 

 

ELO21 Susie Cronin 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

iIOM World Migration Report 2020, https://publications.iom.int/system/files/pdf/wmr_2020.pdf; 
viewed 7 January 2021. 
iiGoogle Play Store, Survival App Description 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.omniumlabstudios.peaceapp.survival&hl=en&gl=U
S; viewed 7 January 2021. 
iiiRaley, Rita. 2009. Tactical Media (Minneapolis : University of Minnesota Press), p.4.  
ivIbid.  
vThe sociologist David Fitzgerald, author of Refuge Beyond Reach: How Rich Democracies Repel 
Asylum Seekers (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2019) in fact began his career as a photojournalist 
and changed paths partially due to issues in the way that media briefs limited the workings of 
representation. (Zoom discussion, ‘Displacement: Global Conversations on Refuge,’ 28 January 2021).    
viWalker Rettberg, Jill. 2014. Seeing Ourselves Through Technology (London: Palgrave Macmillan), p. 
25.  
viiThe information gained from analysing datasets from Instagram has given rise to interesting projects 
that examine the way in which the platform showcases and perhaps indeed engenders inequalities. One 
such project is Inequaligram, http://inequaligram.net/  
viiiWorkeen, A Game for EU Labour Markets Integration,   
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=eu.sirius.workeen&hl=en&gl=US; viewed 7 January 
2021 
ixIbid.  
x Games for Change, ‘About Us’, https://www.gamesforchange.org/who-we-are/about-us/; viewed 7 
January 2021. 
xiTola Onanuga, The Guardian, 28 May 2019, ‘Virtual Reality : How Women are Taking a Leading 
Role in the Sector,’  https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2019/may/28/virtual-reality-how-women-
are-taking-a-leading-role-in-the-sector; viewed 7 January 2021 
xiiIcomedia, ‘Bury me my love’ https://www.icomedia.eu/bury-me-my-love/; viewed 7 January 2021. 
xiiihttps://switchplayer.net/2019/12/21/bury-me-my-love-review/ 
xiv“It effectively connects students with the harrowing journey of a Syrian refugee, even though some 
of the interactive elements are underwhelming.” 
 https://www.commonsense.org/education/app/bury-me-my-love 
xvBrown, Adrienne Marie. 2019. Pleasure Activism: The Politics of Feeling Good (Chico, 

California :AK Press) 

 

11 

