Timothy Wilcox 

Lyric Recollection and the Preservation of Ephemeral and Social Elit 

 

 
 

One of the most striking features of electronic literature – in contrast to most literature we 

read and study – is its capacity for interactions of various kinds. In preserving electronic works 

for future experience, all of those interactions should ideally be preserved and made to function 

in more or less the same manner. The look and sound of certain elements will inevitably change 

somewhat with different hardware, but the overall presentation and the points of entry for the 

reader should remain the same. A more challenging point is the issue of outcomes. A reader may 

have a selection of inputs, but in the case of ephemeral of social electronic literature works, the 

outcome will never be the same. While a player can open A Mind Forever Voyaging at any point 

and interact with Perry Simm, for example, one cannot simply go and interact with the characters 

in a Multi-User Dungeon (MUD) as one would have while logged in during the 1990s, as those 

were real people interacting in real time. Eventually, if you can get anyone interacting at all, it 

may be very different people, or even in the case of encountering the same group of people who 

populated the game-world before, they will approach things from different times in their lives, 

with new perspectives and likely developed writing styles. 

 

Due to these complications of ephemerality, many early electronic literature experiences 

are largely inaccessible. In 1997, Pavel Curtis wrote of MUDs, “it is difficult to properly convey 

the sense of the experience in words. Readers desiring more detailed information are advised to 

try mudding themselves” (124-5). In some ways, it is still possible for readers to “try mudding 

themselves,” but not in the context where it was an addictive new experience pushing the 

boundaries of what we could do with technology. Now, any experience operates in a context of a 

much bigger, more complex – though at times more limited – social Internet. People can turn 

Wilcox 2 

 

away from the world of current social media to play around in an intentionally older system. 

What is missing, though, from those new experiences – which a reader of Curtis in 1997 could 

have encountered, though even then with some distinction – is what mudding was actually, 

actively like for those playing them at its height. Such resignation as Curtis offers is common in 

writing on MUDs, which is why a more literary narrative is useful. In contrast to Curtis telling 

readers to just go see for themselves, Indra Sinha carefully shifts between forms to recreate the 

imaginative depth of the experience in his 1999 memoir, The Cybergypsies. This indirect look is 

in some ways part of the medium itself. One’s personal involvement in the text of a MUD is 

always only a small part, and that involvement (or lack thereof) informs our understanding. 

 

Even in most of the early scholarship on MUDs, as the writers discuss vast social, 

pedagogical, philosophical, and other implications of the medium, they contain their writing 

within something like this memoir style, grounding their analyses in personal experience in 

MUDs. Sherry Turkle (1997), for instance, discusses social interaction in MUDs through a 

discussion of what a selection of players she knew from one MUD server had to say about their 

experiences, goals, and self-perception. Lori Kendall’s Hanging Out in the Virtual Pub: 

Masculinities and Relationships Online, published in 2002, is structured as an ethnography of the 

online forum BlueSky. 

 

In The Cybergypsies, Sinha makes space for the highs and lows of his online, frequently 

MUD-based experience as all crucially forming his imagination. The text begins, “It’s 3 a.m. and 

I’m online to Jesus Slutfucker. JS informs me that he’s typing one-handed, knuckling open a 

beer with the other” (1). Though starting with this, the memoir ends at an advertising awards 

ceremony where he received an award for his work on Bhopal, India for Amnesty International, 

thinking about the absurdity as he sees “Sathyu, who lived in a slum, thanking the champagne 

 

drinkers at the Grosvenor House” (392). The Cybergypsies captures in detail how the social 

experience of MUDs – even the violent world of Shades he chooses – takes him from one 

Wilcox 3 

scenario to the other. 

In 1984, Bhopal was the site of a major gas leak in a pesticide plant owned by the 

American company Union Carbide. The leak killed thousands in the slums of Bhopal and caused 

ongoing medical complications. A critical gap that this current study fills is that despite 

significant attention directed toward Sinha’s fictional writing on the Bhopal disaster in Animal’s 

People, very little has been written on this earlier memoir, despite its detailing the event and how 

Sinha got involved. In this later novel, Sinha discusses Bhopal in terms of a fictional city of 

Khaufpur, for which he made an accompanying website; there is no record of the contents of the 

Cybergypsies website which Sinha links in a 1999 interview on The WELL. Rob Nixon, in his 

book Slow Violence, comments that, “Among the writers I consider, Indra Sinha is by a long 

measure the most digitally attuned” (43). He goes on to argue, “If the quarter-century lag 

between the Union Carbide explosion and Animal People’s appearance marks a shift from 

predigital to digital activism, the lag also allows Sinha to challenge the conventions of what 

constitutes a catastrophic event” (44). While Nixon discusses Sinha’s Khaufpur website and his 

early ad campaigns, he makes no reference to The Cybergypsies. This leads to a clear reversal in 

an endnote: “Arguably, Sinha’s professional training in the image world of advertising left him 

better equipped than most writer-activists of his generation to adapt his skills to the digital era” 

(291). As Sinha’s memoir suggests, it is not that his training in advertising prepared him for the 

digital era; the digital era prepared him for international advocacy. 

Philip Leonard offers the one serious account of Sinha’s memoir. In Literature After 

Globalization, he analyzes the text as part of addressing questions of globality and scale, 

Wilcox 4 

 

particularly as done in the 1990s when the sense of online community as a distinct 

countercultural potentiality was still strong. Leonard writes, “Inhabiting the unruly margin of the 

connected world, these groups do not allow the emergence of a universally transcendent 

consciousness and cannot produce a coherent social order. Going online for these communities 

becomes a renouncing of the universal and a detachment from the global” (45). Leonard 

connects Sinha here with various theoretical ideas, but engages with Cybergypsies very little as a 

literary text. 

Leonard offers a useful starting point for thinking about The Cybergypsies, but leaves 

much of its literary construction and context untouched. The end of the chapter briefly discusses 

the literary qualities of the work, but only in the span of a page. Leonard notes how Sinha’s work 

troubles memoir’s generic distancing from fiction (59), showing instead how such early online 

experiences of community existed largely as fiction and writing (60). He comments, 

“Structurally, Sinha’s text is built around intrusions, interruptions, elisions and narrative 

resequencings which prevent it from sliding into the naturalism that typifies the memoir as a 

genre.” Sinha notably incorporates lengthy passages from De Quincey’s Confessions as a series 

of interruptions into his own narrative, but Leonard does not make this connection clear. Earlier 

in the chapter, he references Sinha’s nod to Coleridge and De Quincey as expressing a similar 

sort of “enchantment” and “delirium” as Sinha presents as part of our relationship to technology 

(broadly defined, including language) (37). Here at the end of the chapter, though, Leonard 

suggests that The Cybergypsies “should be placed in the quasi-literary legacy of the fictitious 

memoir: Defoe, Goldsmith, Miller, Angelou, or Eco – this text rejects the masquerade of pure 

reminiscence and instead embraces writing as both a generic demand and an opportunity to 

trouble memory’s inscription in an act of sterile or uncorrupted recollection” (60). Though 

Wilcox 5 

 

referencing earlier works, Leonard misses the obvious connection to De Quincey. The earlier 

quoted paragraph even references the figure of Bear in Cybergypsies as the “pseudonymously-

named advertising-copywriter who acts as Sinha’s textual persona” (37), an act which parallels 

the use of such personas in the world of Romantic-era London magazines in which De Quincey 

was writing. When Leonard concludes with reference to Sinha’s inclusion of the jumbled 

typography of a corrupted file, a Romantic reading of the text could connect this to De Quincey’s 

idea in Suspiria de Profundis of the brain as palimpsest, in which no memory is ever fully lost 

but only written over. Sinha quotes De Quincey’s discussion of that idea explicitly (372-3). 

This sort of layering of memory and experience is part of what drives Sinha’s view of 

online communication and imagination. He introduces Lilith, who makes a clear distinction 

between online and offline experience, while Sinha insists on a sense of continuity. As Leonard 

notes of Cybergypsies, “this text is as much a chronicle of the growth of online activism and 

mobilization as it is a story about a craving for contact through cables and over airways … a 

medium for gathering and disseminating material that was not visible to the informational 

mainstream at that time” (44). Relatedly, the seeming invisibility of the Bhopal disaster, and its 

surrounding material, is a recurring imaginative concern of the text. Sinha’s process of working 

through that is grounded in his experience of MUDs, which for him was focused primarily in a 

game more violent than the norm. 

Though violent, Shades presented the same core values and challenges as other MUD 

experiences. An ad emphasized it was “More than a game!” and says “Meet people. Make 

friends.” Similar to how A Mind Forever Voyaging leveraged the human intelligence of its player 

to establish the advanced AI of its player-character, the ad questions the reader, “Can YOU 

outwit the brains of real human opponents rather than a pre-programmed computer chip?” Unlike 

Wilcox 6 

 

a computer-driven game with clear rules and limitations, the foundation of Shades in social text 

inputs meant the action could be expanded infinitely. While it still had a core selection of 

commands that allowed for both socializing and combat, the purpose of playing in a MUD over a 

computer-driven game is explicitly the player interaction, and so players would not simply put in 

the minimal inputs necessary to win a fight, but would instead craft a character and maintain that 

character over an extended period of time. Sinha’s memoir records people interacting in-game, 

out of game but still online, and sometimes in real life. An interaction which combines the first 

and last of those gives a strong sense of how Sinha understood the game and its typical player. 

Much of the first third of the memoir builds up to an “immortals only” party – referring 

to a class of skilled, frequent players who have broken a certain points threshold – at which an 

“assassination” “would spark off the First Wyrd War” (23). Once we actually get to this event, 

Sinha comments, “The ‘real’ people in the room were never invited to this party. They’re here on 

sufferance, mere emissaries of the real guests: it’s the personas who are meeting here” (103). 

Sinha’s own sense of values always comes from this remove, which is slightly disillusioned by 

the internal logic of such games, but what he records here is his sense that, while these people 

were interested in being social and making friends through Shades, they really value the personas 

crafted online, with no interest in moving outside of that frame. To capture different levels of 

understanding of what is happening, Sinha shifts into various forms and styles at different times. 

The most prominent mode of the memoir is a series of short, prose accounts of events, 

sometimes from different perspectives, but he also includes various materials as needed. In some 

cases, Sinha’s narration is simply the series of text inputs and outputs which would appear on a 

monitor during a series of virtual actions. In shifting between modes, Sinha makes clear the 

different levels of what is going on: expertise in quickly crafting inputs, imagining scenes, the 

Wilcox 7 

 

social understanding of larger events, and so on. Where Sinha will sometimes simply include a 

line such as “>g brick” to narrate a character picking up (getting) a “broken paving brick” (71) – 

in contrast to which the usual prose descriptions more clearly reflect the addition of imaginative 

work – his description of the assassination utilizes a different approach. After one player sneaks 

away from the party and logs into an alternate account to start a fight with another player present 

at the party, the two end up both online and engage in combat. At the party, a crowd watches the 

event unfold on the monitors, and Sinha records the virtual activity in narrative verse which 

serves to give weight to the actions (111-3). Understanding these different meanings and the 

stakes of such online activity will later support Sinha’s advocacy where he is tasked with making 

people see, and care about, an invisible, long ago gas leak. 

In Cybergypsies, Sinha refers to the brain needed to craft and read such advertisements as 

the “Coconet” (117). This, which “runs on a human brain” and is contained in a coconut-like 

skull, he suggests is “the most powerful computer net in existence.” He goes on to say, “The 

limitless energy-filled space it generates has been known to explorers since the first sapient 

dawn: it is the human imagination.” Sinha’s comments here contextualize the events of the party 

where the “real” world becomes entangled with the “cyber-world.” To this distinction between 

“real” and “cyber,” Sinha corrects, “Dozens of worlds collide daily in our lives, unnoticed. We 

compartmentalize experiences. Some, we say, are ‘real’, the rest ‘in the mind’. What we 

constantly forget is that experience is all in the mind.” He soon after records learning this view 

of the “real” from Luna, who asks how much of our “real” lives he thinks is “lived in the 

imagination” (127). In response to his guess of “Sixty percent,” Luna corrects, “One hundred 

percent.” Sinha’s and Luna’s comments connect conceptually back to the Romantic interest in 

not just nature itself but the interplay between the mind and nature, where the main interest is in 

 

our own imaginative perception. It is in this context that Sinha brings in Coleridge and De 

Quincey in order to promote the distinct value of something like MUDs. In The Cybergypsies, 

Sinha experiences first virtual murders, then explores the lively dissonance of Bhopal to express 

Wilcox 8 

in a way effective for advocacy work. 

The selection of Coleridge and De Quincey as Sinha’s points of reference is partly due to 

the comparison between opium use and cyberspatial experience, but these two Romantic authors 

also have more distinct contributions. The conflation of cyberspace with drug use is standard in 

cyberpunk, one of Sinha’s contemporary contexts. Additionally, the idea of “cyberaddiction” is 

central to the memoir and its initial reception. In a 2000 study in the field of management 

information systems, Ritu Agarwal and Elena Karahanna cite Cybergypsies passingly as an 

“anecdotal report” describing video game addiction (667). Similarly, in a 2013 study, “Diving 

Too Deep: How Cognitive Absorption and Group Learning Behavior Affect Individual 

Learning,” the authors (Massimo Magni et al.) take Sinha’s memoir as a critical example of 

absorption wherein a disconnect can cause computer users to focus on “the process rather than 

on the activity itself” (52). An early review in The Guardian, titled “Darling, it’s me or the 

modem,” refers to the work as “a cautionary tale, a dark parable of what can go wrong when you 

submit yourself entirely to a realm of stylised fantasy.” In an interview on The WELL, Sinha 

notes, “When I say addicted, I mean at least five hours a day/night online,” totaling costs of 

approximately “Fifty thousand pounds” over a ten-year period, as well as suggesting in 

Cybergypsies that a friend would suffer “withdrawal symptoms” if offline too long (82). This 

element of the memoir then also inspires the graphic novel The Surrogates by Robert Venditti, 

which dramatizes the idea by depicting a society where one can pilot a robotic surrogate body for 

professional or personal use, causing dependence on this technology. Venditti explained the 

Wilcox 9 

 

influence in an interview with the Orlando Sentinel, stating he had read The Cybergypsies as a 

graduate student at the University of Central Florida. There he described Sinha’s memoir as a 

research project more than a literary work: “Sinha studied people addicted to the Internet. 

Obsession with alternate reality was causing divorces, people were losing their jobs.” 

While the memoir culminates in Sinha’s greater understanding of this online world and 

his relationship to it, most of the text involves him obsessively immersed in that world. Early on, 

he comments, “fighting in Shades is an art in itself” (57). This comes with no explicit 

comparison to De Quincey’s presentation of murder as a fine art, but given the recurring role of 

De Quincey in the overall text, there is an inescapable relevance. Sinha starts with discussing the 

historical murders of Jack the Ripper and pursuing a trail of relevant locations (68). In this 

context, he writes, “A weird fantasy starts inventing itself in my mind,” leading into an earlier 

quoted series of text commands and brief descriptions of effect which would play out in a violent 

scenario such as in Shades (71). This sequence of commands is then returned to at the start of a 

section titled “The art of death” (77). In the process, Sinha has shifted from the historical Ripper 

to a program named “Ripper” which is used to automate some elements of fighting on Shades 

(79). The value of the program is that everything in the game is text-based and playing out in 

real-time with other writers, and so, “The problem with all these fine tactics is that they must be 

typed and if you’re a bad typist, you are dead.” Such automation, however, is a form of absolute 

detachment and removes any sense of passion. For most players, Sinha suggests, “Killing one’s 

friends is as natural as breathing. One murders daily with a song in one’s heart” (78). These lines 

intentionally sound horrific when removed from their proper context, but make sense within the 

idea of (virtual) murder as fine art. In this text-based medium, effective killing means skillful 

reading, skillful typing, and an artful sense of what one can do in this virtual environment as well 

Wilcox 10 

 

as what this other person is doing. Though such artistry manifests as virtual violence, the danger 

is ultimately a tool to increase one’s rapid engagement with another person online. 

At one point in the memoir, Sinha comments that “what we imagine, we make true.” For 

Sinha, depending on how responsible one is with one’s imagination online, one can either create 

new horrors or something like the “Anatomy of a crime against humanity” appeal for support in 

Bhopal that manifested in the construction of an actual medical clinic in Bhopal, India – not 

something simply described in cyberspace. The possibility of real-world action is suggested from 

the start in Cybergypsies, even before Sinha makes clear what “real world” impact could mean: 

“It is a computer-generated mirage, a cloud castle, a Fata Morgana, yet real people meet here and 

start things which ricochet into the real world” (5). Just as Sinha eventually becomes involved in 

real-world projects, some of the people he encounters online are already involved in projects and 

organizations, and so this global network offers potential for productive connections. Sinha finds 

global connections populated instead by “the cybergypsies”: “the explorers of cyberspace. Theirs 

were the first camps in cyberspace. They mapped it and made its links. They named the 

constellations of its night sky” (8). Sinha’s text is in part about recording this history which was 

already beginning to be forgotten, while he also extends this history further: “generations of 

graffitists have left messages of the utmost puerility … Some older scratches further back in the 

cave: a date, 1781, and initials which look like S.T.C.” – the initials of Samuel Taylor Coleridge 

(19). 

Sinha’s interest is not simply in the personal narrative of getting involved in the online 

world as an adult and applying lessons to advocacy work, but the more fundamental dynamics of 

online sociality and imagination which make up the environment in which younger generations 

might then grow up. The discoveries in cyberspace which may appear shocking to Sinha could 

Wilcox 11 

 

simply be assumed by a future generation. In this way, the models for online reading and writing 

matter, and Sinha looks in part to Coleridge and De Quincey. At the same time, Sinha’s image of 

Sathyu at the awards ceremony marks a crucial divide. As Shashi Tharoor describes, “You can 

tell the rich from the poor by their Internet connections. The dividing line is not just the poverty 

line but the fiber-optic and high-speed digital lines. The key is the keyboard. Those who do not 

have one risk marginalization; their imagination does not cross borders” (88). The Romantic 

lineage in early electronic writing is a line of inquiry addressed toward such problems. Through 

his reflective mode, Sinha provides a clear vision of why this line of influence is valuable. Sinha 

comments early on, “Being inside someone else’s computer is like wandering round their house” 

(5). As Gaston Bachelard writes about houses in The Poetics of Space, “If we cannot imagine, 

we cannot foresee” (xxxiv). The history which separates us from this early electronic literature 

will always remain a point of difference between the visions of these writers and what we have 

now, but they can still inform our reading and writing practices moving forward. Among more 

formal archival efforts, in imagining a long literature history of electronic literature for the 

future, lyric narratives – particularly in incorporating instances of the computer text as in Sinha – 

will inevitably play a significant role in how future generations experience ephemeral and social 

elit works. 

 

 

Wilcox 12 

 

Works Cited 
 
Argawal, Ritu and Elena Karahanna. “Time Flies When You're Having Fun: Cognitive 

Absorption and Beliefs about Information Technology Usage.” MIS Quarterly, Vol. 24, 
No. 4, Dec. 2000, pp. 665-694. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/3250951. Accessed 12 Mar. 
2019. 

Bachelard, Gaston. The Poetics of Space. Translated by Maria Jolas. Boston: Beacon Press, 

1994. 

Curtis, Pavel. “Mudding: Social Phenomena in Text-Based Virtual Realities.” Culture of the 

Internet, edited by Sara Kiesler, Routledge, 1997, pp. 121-142. 

“Darling, it’s me or the modem.” The Guardian, 3 May 1999, 

www.theguardian.com/theguardian/1999/may/04/features11.g22. Accessed 25 Mar. 
2019. 

Kendall, Lori. Hanging Out in the Virtual Pub: Masculinities and Relationships Online. 

University of California Press, 2002. 

Leonard, Phillip. Literature After Globalization: Textuality, Technology and the Nation-State. 

Bloomsbury, 2013. 

Magni, Massimo, et al. “Diving Too Deep: How Cognitive Absorption and Group Learning 

Behavior Affect Individual Learning.” Academy of Management Learning & Education, 
Vol. 12, No. 1, Mar. 2013, pp. 51-69. JSTOR, www.jstor.org /stable/23412391. Accessed 
12 Mar. 2019. 

Nixon, Rob. Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor. Harvard University Press, 

2011. 

“Shades.” Games World, games.world.co.uk/shades/inshades/history/Mags.htm. Accessed 25 

Mar. 2019. 

Sinha, Indra. “Crime against humanity.” Ads of the World, 16 July 2007, 

www.adsoftheworld.com/media/print/crime_against_humanity. Accessed 25 Mar. 2019. 

--. The Cybergypsies. Simon & Schuster, 1999. 
--. Interviewed by Reva Basch. The WELL, 

www.people.well.com/conf/inkwell.vue/topics/52/Indra-Sinha-Cybergypsies-Lust-Wa-
page01.html. Accessed 25 Mar. 2019. 

Tharoor, Shashi. “Globalization and the Human Imagination.” World Policy Journal, Vol. 21, 
No. 2, Summer 2004, pp. 85-91. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/40209922. Accessed 12 
Mar. 2019. 

Turkle, Sherry. “Constructions and Reconstructions of Self in Virtual Reality: Playing in the 

MUDs.” Culture of the Internet, edited by Sara Kiesler, Routledge, 1997, pp. 143-156. 

Venditti, Robert. Interviewed by Roger Moore, Orlando Sentinel, 

https://www.orlandosentinel.com/features/orl-livmovie-story-venditti092009sep20-
story.html. Accessed 23 Jul. 2019. 

